 ACTIVITY MODULE METHODOLOGY

SOIL ORGANIC CARBON ACTIVITY MODULE FOR COVER
CROPS

SDG 13

PUBLICATION DATE: 02.10.2024
VERSION: 1.0
NEXT PLANNED UPDATE: 1.10.2027
RELATED DOCUMENTS:
Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology, Version 1.0

Acknowledgements:
This activity module was developed by TREES Consulting on behalf of Agoro Carbon
Alliance US, Inc.
.

TREES Consulting
Sihleggstrasse 32
8832 Wollerau
Switzerland

Agoro Carbon Alliance US, Inc.
100 North Tampa Street, Suite 3200
Tampa, Florida 33602
USA

                                        Climate Security and Sustainable Development
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Table of Contents

             Summary..................................................................................................... 3
             Definitions and References .............................................................................. 3
             Applicability.................................................................................................. 5
             Additionality ................................................................................................. 6
             Project Boundaries ........................................................................................ 7
             Emission Reduction Quantification Approach....................................................... 9
             Baseline Scenario .........................................................................................13
             Project Scenario ...........................................................................................14
             Uncertainty .................................................................................................15

                Other Emissions ........................................................................................16
                Leakage ...................................................................................................21
                Monitoring................................................................................................22

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                                                    2
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

       Summary

This Soil Organic Carbon Activity Module (hereafter referred to as "this Activity
Module") focuses on cover crops planted to cover the bare soil during fallow periods to
increase soil organic carbon (SOC). It is applicable globally.

In a typical baseline situation, crop fields are left bare (i.e., without plant growth)
from the time of harvest until the next crop is planted (fallow period). The project
introduces cover crops to be planted during the fallow period to cover the soil and
keep roots in the soil, which improves soil condition and increases SOC.

This Activity Module addresses different categories of cover crops (legumes, non-
legumes, grasses, and brassicas) and options for cover crop application depending on
and aligning with the associated practices (reduced till, no-till) that are implemented.
Cover cropping can comprise a single species or a mixture of species and can use
annual, biennial, or perennial vegetation. At the end of the fallow period, cover crops
are usually terminated to prevent competition with the primary crop and to allow the
timely planting of the next crop. In no-till approaches, cover crops are left on the soil
surface to support weed control (Osipitan et al. 2018, Osipitan et al. 2019) and
nitrogen inputs before a primary crop is planted (Abdalla et al. 2019). Grazing may
also be used to terminate cover crops.

In line with the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology, this Activity Module
provides three approaches for quantification of SOC increase. This accommodates that
not all relevant measurements and parameters may be available to projects. Approach
1 requires on-site measurements to directly document pre-project and project SOC
stock levels; Approach 2 uses datasets, parameters, and/or models from peer-
reviewed publications to quantify baseline and project SOC stock levels; and Approach
3 applies default factors to quantify SOC changes relating to the general methodology
described in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (hereafter referred to as "IPCC 2019"), using a
Tier 2­level approach whenever possible. For Approaches 2 and 3, project developers
shall document that the coefficients applied are conservative and applicable to the
project site and management practice.

       Definitions and References

2.1 | Definitions

2.1.1 | Terms and definitions are listed in the Soil Organic Carbon Framework
            Methodology, Section 2.1. In addition, the following module-specific
            definitions apply:

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                               3
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Term             Definition
Farm
                 A farm is an area of land that is devoted primarily to
Cover crop       agricultural processes with the primary objective of rearing
                 livestock or producing food and other crops. Under this
Full tillage     Activity Module, `farm' encompasses all such lands legally
(full-till)      registered as part of the farm's holdings as well as associated
                 leased lands with a valid contract.
Reduced tillage
(reduced-till)   A cover crop is a close-growing, dense canopy crop that
                 provides soil protection, seedling protection, and soil
                 improvement between periods of normal crop production
                 (Soil Science Society of America, 2008). A cover crop is not
                 harvested, and biomass is not removed from a field (this is
                 particularly relevant to SOC).

                 Full tillage refers to field practices leading to substantial soil
                 disturbance with full inversion and/or frequent, within-year
                 tillage operations, while leaving <30% of the surface covered
                 by residues at the time of planting (IPCC 2019, Volume 4,
                 Chapter 5, Section 5.2.3.3).

                 Reduced tillage refers to field practices with primary and/or
                 secondary tillage but with reduced soil disturbance that is
                 usually shallow and without full soil inversion; this normally
                 leaves surface with >30% coverage by residues at planting
                 (IPCC 2019, Volume 4, Chapter 4, Section 5.2.3.3).

Zero tillage     Zero tillage is an agricultural technique for growing crops or
(no-till)        pasture without mechanically disturbing the soil through
                 tillage (including disturbance from non-turning tillage such as
                 rippers and disc harrows). Crop is sown directly into soil that
                 has not been tilled since the harvest of the previous crop.
                 Zero tillage has more than 30% cover of the soil surface with
                 residues.

                 Climate Security and Sustainable Development                        4
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

2.2 | References
2.2.1 | In addition to the methodologies, methodological tools, guidelines, and key

            sources listed in the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology, this
            Activity Module refers to the following key publications:

              2.2.2 |
              · IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Volume 4

                   Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (http://www.ipcc-
                   nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/vol4.html).
              · IPCC 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
                   Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Volume 4 Agriculture, Forestry and Other
                   Land Use (https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/vol4.html).
              · Osipitan, O. A., Dille, J. A., Assefa, Y., Knezevic, S. Z., 2018. Cover crop
                   for early season weed suppression in crops: systematic review and meta-
                   analysis. Agronomy Journal 110: 2211-2221.
                   https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2017.12.0752
              · Osipitan, O. A., Dille, J. A., Assefa, Y., Radicetti, E., Ayeni, A., Knezevic,
                   S. Z., 2019. Impact of cover crop management on level of weed
                   suppression: a meta-analysis. Crop Science 59: 833-842.
                   https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2018.09.0589
              · Soil Science Society of America, 2008. Glossary of Soil Science Terms.
                   Soil Science Society of America, Madison, Wisconsin. 88 pp.

       Applicability
3.1.1 | A project applying this Activity Module shall comply with the applicability

            conditions specified below and with those in the Soil Organic Carbon
            Framework Methodology. In addition, the project shall comply with applicable
            Land Use & Forests Activity Requirements (hereafter referred to as "LUF
            Activity Requirements" or Agriculture Activity Requirements when published
            and in force) and the Gold Standard for the Global Goals Principles &
            Requirements (hereafter referred to as "Principles & Requirements").

3.1.2 | Applicability conditions:

            · Projects are eligible in all countries.

            · Generally, entire farms or selected fields/areas of a farm are eligible (see
                 Section 5.1: Spatial Boundary).

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                    5
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

            · The Activity Module shall not be applicable to farms which have been using
                 cover crops for more than one season within five years prior to project
                 start, even if such application was on fields not included in the project.

            · In line with the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology, this Activity
                 Module accounts for only those benefits in the SOC pool. No other pools or
                 emission reductions (e.g., in nitrous oxide [N2O] due to reduced fertiliser
                 need) can be accounted for as benefits.

            · Cover cropping can comprise a single species or a mixture of species and
                 can use annual, biennial, or perennial vegetation.

3.1.3 | Other than cover crops, organic carbon inputs to the field shall not be
            changed as part of the project by more than 5% from baseline period
            average. If this Activity Module is stacked with an additional Gold Standard
            methodology or activity module which uses the same quantification approach
            in the project (measurement or compatible SOC model allowing distinction of
            impacts between cover crops and organic inputs from other practice changes)
            and considers respective leakage effects, this applicability condition may be
            omitted.

            · If the project includes change of tillage practices, the same quantification
                 approach (measurements, models, or defaults) shall be used for both
                 activities and shall be fully aligned to ensure that overall benefits are
                 quantified correctly and not double-counted. Changes in tillage practices
                 shall be documented and shall follow quantification approaches according
                 to a respective Gold Standard­approved methodology or activity module.

3.1.4 | Application of herbicides to terminate cover crops shall be minimised, and
            negative environmental impacts shall be prevented in accordance with Gold
            Standard Safeguarding Principle 9.6 (Pesticides & Fertilisers). Use of
            herbicides related to the project, specifically for crop termination and weed
            control, shall not be increased by more than 5% from baseline period
            average.

       Additionality

4.1.1 | All Gold Standard projects shall demonstrate that they would not have been
            implemented without the benefits of carbon revenue. Specific rules and
            guidelines on how to assess additionality are in the Additionality section of the
            LUF Activity Requirements and the Additionality Requirements for Agriculture
            Projects Template.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                   6
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

       Project Boundaries

5.1 | Spatial Boundary
5.1.1 | For spatial boundaries, the rules and requirements defined in Soil Organic

            Carbon Framework Methodology apply.

5.1.2 | Spatial boundary description specific to this Activity Module:

            · Generally, entire farms or selected fields/areas of a farm are eligible. If the
                 project is implemented only on selected fields, all applicability conditions
                 and requirements in the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology
                 (including maintaining yield) and from this Activity Module shall be applied
                 to these specific fields. These fields shall remain in the project during the
                 entire crediting period (i.e., no change of participating fields within a farm
                 during the crediting period is allowed).

            · This Activity Module requires greenhouse gas (GHG) sources, sinks, and
                 reservoirs (SSR) as identified in Figure 5-01 to be considered, with a focus
                 on their impact on SOC and increase of emissions from the project. The
                 boundary thus includes all impacted field activities (machine use, tillage,
                 application of fertiliser and pesticides), including main crop practices. As
                 SOC increase from cover crops is driven primarily through inputs of
                 biomass (root and residue) as well as rhizodeposits, growth and residue
                 management for cover crops is essential to assess SOC impact. For the
                 same reason, other organic inputs (e.g., manure, compost) shall be
                 monitored. As the project newly introduces cover crops to the field,
                 emissions from the production and transport of seeds shall be considered.
                 As no changes are expected to be made to farm infrastructure or handling
                 of main crops, these activities are not included in the project boundary for
                 quantification.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                     7
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

                                   Farm facilities                         Farm facilities construction,
                                                                      operations,* and decommissioning
                                         Farm equipment manufacture
                                                 and transportation*

Off-field activity                 On-field activity                  Fertiliser application
           Fertiliser production*            Crop biomass growth and  Pesticide application
                                                          residues
      Cover crop seed production                                                Tillage
                Seed transport                         Machine use

                                                     Organic inputs

Project-controlled SSR             Post-harvest processing            Crop processing
Project-related SSR                                  Crop transport
Excluded SSR

Materials / products flow

* Fertiliser production, farm equipment, and facilities operations are excluded under the assumption that no
      significant change to these emissions results from implementation of the project.

                                                   Figure 5-01: Spatial Project Boundary

5.2 | Temporal Boundary
5.2.1 | This Activity Module requires a crediting period of 10 years to account for the

            slow SOC buildup and to ensure long-term SOC impacts. The crediting period
            can be renewed once.

5.3 | Carbon Pools

5.3.1 | Carbon pool description

         · In line with the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology, this Activity
              Module accounts for only those benefits in the SOC pool. Additional pools
              (e.g., biomass and litter) may be used for calculation of SOC change, but no
              GHG sequestration in pools other than SOC shall be accounted for as
              benefits.

         · No emission reduction from other GHG sources (e.g., fossil fuel use or
              fertiliser application) shall be reported for benefits under this Activity
              Module.

5.4 | Greenhouse Gases

5.4.1 | Following the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology, all GHG sinks and
            sources affected by its activities shall be monitored.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                                  8
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

5.4.2 | For this Activity Module, this specifically includes any significant increases in
            carbon dioxide (CO), methane (CH4), and NO emissions from the project.

       Emission Reduction Quantification Approach

Calculations for overall benefits follow the equations in the Emissions Reduction
Quantification Approaches section of the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology.
The following sections describe the approaches and calculations that are specific to
this Activity Module.

6.1 | Approaches for Baseline and Project Scenario Quantification
6.1.1 | This Activity Module allows application of all three quantification approaches

            as described in the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology. Project
            proponents shall select the most specific approach possible with the data
            available, giving preference to local data sources and models as outlined in
            the decision tree in Figure 2 of the Soil Organic Carbon Framework
            Methodology.

6.2 | Approach 1 (On-Site Measurements of Soil Organic Carbon)
6.2.1 | Additional requirements:

         · SOC measurements shall be taken at a suitable time of year, e.g., at the
              beginning of the season for main crops, with repeated measurements
              performed at the same time of the year to avoid bias due to short-term
              variation in soil carbon pools (e.g., after harvest of main crops and tilling of
              crop residue into the soil). The project documentation shall specify the
              timing of soil sampling, i.e., the season and crop rotation phase, as
              applicable, to be implemented by all sampled farms in the project or
              program.

         · To avoid overestimation of SOC stocks, measurements shall always be
              performed before any significant carbon inputs such as organic or partially
              organic fertilisers, including compost and manure, as well as other carbon
              sources, e.g., in lime or other soil inputs and soil disturbance events
              (tillage).

         · Bulk density shall be considered in all quantification approaches.
              Quantification shall be done on an "equivalent mass basis" to properly
              quantify carbon impacts, i.e., if increased bulk density is measured in the
              project scenario, respective layer depth shall be reduced proportionally
              when calculating SOC change.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                    9
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

6.2.2 | Special care shall be taken to ensure that litter on the soil surface (crop
            residue) is not included in the SOC quantification.

6.3 | Approach 2 (Application of Models, Research Data)

6.3.1 | Additional requirements:

         · Project developers shall provide evidence that calculation approaches,
              datasets, parameters, and models from peer-reviewed publications to
              estimate baseline and project SOC stocks in the project are conservative
              and applicable to the project site conditions and management practices.1 In
              accordance with the LUF Activity Requirements, "conservativeness" shall
              mean that from a range of available data, the value resulting in lower GHG
              benefits shall be applied.

         · Models and datasets applied shall be calibrated locally, i.e., using project-
              specific data. Global models without such local parametrisation and
              validation shall not be applied. Application of global defaults for soil
              respiration, e.g., "Q10" values to quantify temperature effects on respiration,
              is not allowed.

         · Project documentation shall include evidence that the sources used are
              applicable to main crops and levels of yield (production intensity),
              management practices (e.g., tillage2), and cover crop species and practices
              (e.g., duration of cover crop growth) used in the project area for baseline
              and project scenarios. Evidence shall also be provided that datasets and
              models have sufficient temporal resolution (i.e., multiple data points per
              year) to account for impacts of seasonal variations in practices and other
              factors such as changing weather conditions. If the model used does not
              allow seasonal crop and practice variations, data shall be aggregated to a
              representative annual value with and without cover crops.

         · Parameters for process-based models shall be calibrated and verified
              following best practice, using at least five years of data for calibration and
              three years of independent data for verification. Both calibration and
              verification datasets shall match project conditions as outlined above. Any

1 Refer to stratification criteria (Section 7.1.4) for factors determining applicability to project conditions. All factors
  listed for stratification shall be assessed to confirm applicability.

2 Changes in tillage due to cover crops shall be represented in the model parameters at the level required by the
  specific model applied.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                                                 10
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

              gaps in datasets and procedures and how they were addressed in the model
              calibration and verification shall be reported at validation.

         · SOC measurements for a representative sample in each stratum of the
              project area shall be made at project start and at least once every five
              years, applying proven methodology (see Section 6.2 above) and using
              statistically assessed model results or research data for quantification. If
              significant differences from modelled results or research data are found,
              models shall be refined.

6.4 | Approach 3 (Default Factors and IPCC Models)

6.4.1 | Additional requirements: For Approach 3, this Activity Module provides two
            alternative calculations in addition to the IPCC Tier 1/2 approach as listed in
            the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology:

             · Approach 3.1 follows the method described in the Soil Organic Carbon
                 Framework Methodology but requires Tier 2 data (instead of global
                 defaults) to allow calculation for cover crops.

             · Approach 3.2 applies the "Steady State Method" that was also introduced
                 in IPCC 2019. This approach is somewhat more complex in calculation but
                 uses a different set of data that is more readily available for cropping
                 systems and is also applicable to cover crops.

6.4.2 | Approach 3.1 applies default equations to estimate SOC changes as
            described for Approach 3 in the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology,
            based on a Tier 2 approach according to IPCC 2019. Cover crop residue shall
            be considered as "organic inputs" only. However, as no specific stock change
            factors for cover crops are available in the IPCC guidelines, national or
            regional Tier 2 parameters for organic input stock change factors specific to
            cover crops must be used, in line with the Soil Organic Carbon Framework
            Methodology. This Activity Module thus requires that national or regional Tier
            2 SOC reference values (SOCREF) and stock change factors shall be applied in
            Equations 4 and 6 of the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology. If
            tillage practices are changed due to the introduction of cover crops, stock
            change factors for tillage practices (see Section 2.1.1 for definitions) shall also
            be applied in accordance with the Tier 2 data source.

6.4.3 | Approach 3.2 applies the IPCC Tier 2 "Steady State Approach" according to
            IPCC 2019, Volume 4, Chapter 5 (see Table 6-01 for references). When
            applying the Steady State Method at the project level, the following
            interpretation and additional guidance shall be applied to the IPCC 2019
            descriptions and procedures:

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                     11
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

                · The IPCC 2019 term "grid cell or region" shall be interpreted as field
                   strata or individual fields, as appropriate to achieve conservative results
                   at the field level within Gold Standard uncertainty requirements.

                · Quantification shall consider all inputs to the fields for baseline and
                   project scenarios at the field or field stratum level, including inputs from
                   all crops separately (harvested crops for baseline; harvested crops plus
                   cover crops for project scenario), as well as potential other organic inputs
                   such as green manure, compost, or animal manure.

                · Change in tillage practices (see Section 2.1.1 for definitions) due to cover
                   crop management shall be considered per the guidance provided in IPCC
                   2019 and in accordance with the Tier 2 data source.

                · Project-specific data and parameters shall be applied if available.
                   Evidence for applicability of such data shall be provided with the project
                   documentation.

                · If no project-specific data is available, Tier 2 parameters listed in IPCC
                   2019 (see Table 6-01 below) may be applied, considering parameter
                   uncertainties as listed. It is recommended to perform a sensitivity
                   analysis with minimum and maximum input parameters to ensure
                   conservative benefits estimations in case of high uncertainties. Note:
                   Crop volumes, soil, and weather data used in the quantification shall
                   always be based on local information.

                · All input parameters used in this approach shall be monitored and
                   reported, including source and rationale for selection (see Section 12).

                · If the project includes tillage changes, Approach 3.2 shall be applied only
                   if no separate calculation of tillage impacts on SOC is performed (e.g.,
                   not applying any separate SOC modules under the Soil Organic Carbon
                   Framework Methodology or other tillage-focused methodology to account
                   for SOC benefits from tillage change).

                · For reference, the calculation spreadsheet and example data provided in
                   IPCC 2019 may be consulted (see reference in Table 6-01). Application
                   shall require the use of appropriate datasets as described above.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                     12
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Table 6-01: Key References to IPCC 2019 Steady State Method

TOPIC                                                          REFERENCE IPCC 2019,
                                                               VOL. 4, CHAPTER 5
Description of Steady State Method                             Pages 5.15 to 5.18
Step-by-step procedure                                         Pages 5.23 to 5.26
Equations for Steady State Method                              Pages 5.18 to 5.23
Default value table for model parameters                       Table 5.5A, page 5.31
Default value table for nitrogen and lignin contents in crops  Table 5.5B, page 5.32

Default value table for carbon to nitrogen ratios and lignin   Table 5.5C, page 5.33
contents in livestock manure                                   Separate tool3

Tier 2 Steady State Method spreadsheet (MS Excel)

       Baseline Scenario

7.1 | Baseline Calculations

7.1.1 | Quantification for SOC in the baseline (SOCBL,y) shall follow the rules,
            approaches, calculations, and parameters in the Baseline Scenario section of
            the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology.

7.1.2 | Baseline data is required for five years per the Soil Organic Carbon
            Framework Methodology. If five-year baseline data is not fully available for a
            field within a stratum (e.g., it was leased less than five years prior to project
            start), evidence shall be provided that average baseline conditions for the
            stratum apply to the field lacking data, referencing the stratification criteria
            described below.

7.1.3 | Baseline period may be extended to cover full rotation periods; avoid
            including fragments of rotations in the baseline quantification, e.g., in a three-
            year crop rotation system, a six-year baseline period will deliver more
            consistent results, including all relevant practices, inputs, and crop yields for
            two full rotations.

3 https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/pdf/4_Volume4/Vol4_Ch5_Tier2_Steady_State_Method-
     Spreadsheet.xlsx

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                         13
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

7.1.4 | To determine the baseline of the eligible project area, the land shall be
            stratified into modelling units (MUs) according to criteria in Section 6 of the
            Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology. In addition, the following
            criteria shall be considered in stratification:

            · Mineral soil type4
            · Tillage practices
            · Specific crops (and crop rotations) and production period
            · Productivity (e.g., net primary productivity or crop yield)
            · Fallow (bare) period

            For each stratum (MU), SOC measurements shall be performed (Approach 1)
            and/or model parameters shall be identified and verified (Approach 2 or 3).

7.1.5 | If a model is used to quantify baseline SOC (Approach 2), full transparency
            shall be provided on input data and parametrisation. Application of "black
            box" models is not allowed.

       Project Scenario

8.1 | Project Calculations
8.1.1 | Quantification for SOC in the project scenario (SOCt,y) shall follow the rules,

            approaches, calculations, and parameters in the Project Scenario section of
            the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology.

8.1.2 | This Activity Module addresses different categories of cover crops (legumes,
            non-legumes, grasses, and brassicas) and options for cover crop application
            depending on and aligning with the associated practices (reduced till, no-till)
            that are implemented. Cover cropping can comprise a single species or a
            mixture of species and can use annual, biennial, or perennial vegetation.
            Quantifications for all approaches shall consider specific cover crops and
            practices (including cover crop termination and residue cover) applied. When
            measuring (Approach 1), respective criteria shall be considered in the project
            area stratification for sampling. For model application (Approach 2 or 3),
            calculation and parameters shall be adapted to the specific project situation.

4 e.g. World Reference Base for Soil Resources (WRB) Reference Soil Groups (RSG)

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                 14
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

8.1.3 | If other agricultural activities besides cover crops are introduced in a project
            (e.g., tillage change), interactions shall be considered by applying the same
            SOC quantification approaches (Approach 1, 2, or 3). If models are applied
            (Approach 2 or 3), they shall specifically cover all activities in the project
            scenario.

8.1.4 | For the project scenario, the eligible project area shall be stratified into MUs
            according to the criteria in Section 7 of the Soil Organic Carbon Framework
            Methodology. In addition, the following criteria shall be considered in
            stratification. Baseline strata with bare land shall be subdivided based on
            cover crop type and practices.

            · Mineral soil type
            · Tillage practices
            · Specific crops (or crop rotations) and production period
            · Productivity (e.g., net primary productivity or crop yield)
            · Fallow (bare) period (relevant only if part of the project area lands remain

                 uncovered for all or part of the year, e.g., due to environmental conditions
                 preventing cover crops at the time)
            · Cover crop period
            · Cover crop type

            For each stratum (MU), SOC measurements shall be performed (Approach 1)
            and/or model parameters shall be identified and verified (Approach 2 or 3).

8.1.5 | If a model is used to quantify project SOC (Approach 2), full transparency
            shall be provided on input data and parametrisation. Application of "black
            box" models is not allowed.

       Uncertainty

9.1.1 | Calculation of uncertainty shall follow the rules and equations in the Soil
            Organic Carbon Framework Methodology.

9.1.2 | If no information on Standard Deviation (SD) or Standard Error (SE) is known
            for a parameter, SE of 50% of the parameter value shall be assumed. For the
            calculations of the upper and lower confidence intervals, a t-value of 3 shall
            be applied. Exceptions to this rule are accepted default values that are
            considered constant (e.g., physical conversion rates, global warming
            potentials).

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                   15
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Other Emissions

10.1 | Project Emissions

10.1.1 |Significant additional GHG emissions (>5% total) due to the project shall be
            accounted for. For this Activity Module, that explicitly includes emissions from
            cover crop seed production and transport, increased fertiliser input, fuel and
            electricity use, and other agrochemical emissions.

10.1.2 |As such emissions may differ between strata, calculation for this Activity
            Module shall follow the rules and equations described in Equations 1 through
            8, which replace the area-wide calculation in Equations 12 through 18 of the
            Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology. They follow the same approach
            but expand calculation to include cover crop seed production and transport,
            and they allow application of different emission factors and quantities for
            different strata.

   -0 = -0 + -0 + -0 + -0                               (Eq. 1)

Where:

PEt-0 = emissions from project activities in the calculation period [tCO2e]
FEt-0 = emissions from increased fertiliser use in the calculation period [tCO2e]
FUt-0 = emissions from increased fuel and electricity use in the calculation

            period [tCO2e]
SPTt-0 = emissions from cover crop seed production and transport in the

            calculation period [tCO2e]
AEt-0 = other agrochemical emissions in the calculation period [tCO2e]

10.2 |Increased Nitrogen Fertiliser Input

10.2.1 |Emissions from increased nitrogen (N) fertiliser input in the project scenario
            as compared to the baseline scenario are calculated as follows. No
            differentiation is made between synthetic and organic N fertiliser. This
            equation shall not be applied for decreases in N fertiliser input, in which case
            FEt-0 is considered 0. To account for reductions in fertiliser input (and the
            respective GHG emissions reductions), a separate Gold Standard methodology
            shall be applied.

-0 = [, × =1(,, - ,)]                                   (Eq. 2)

Where:

FEt-0     = emissions from increased fertiliser use in the calculation period [tCO2e].
FEPR,y,a  Must be  0 in this Activity Module (i.e. no accounting of reductions).
          = N fertiliser input in stratum y under the project scenario in year a of the
          calculation period [kgN]

          Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                        16
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

FEBL,y  = mean annual N fertiliser input in stratum y under the baseline scenario
        [kgN]
T       = number of years in the calculation period [yr]
EFFE,y  = Conversion factor for emissions from N fertiliser in stratum y [tCO2e
        kgN-1]. IPCC 2019 aggregated default value5 for EFFE is 0.01.
        Disaggregated default values in IPCC 2019 Table 11.1 may be used if
        fertiliser inputs are known per fertiliser type.

FEPR and FEBL shall be documented by the project developer. For FEBL, mean
annual input is calculated based on respective management records for five
years prior to project start. If no adequate documentation can be provided,
FEBL shall be no more than 50% of FEPR.

10.3 |Increased Combustion of Fossil Fuels and Electricity Use

10.3.1 |Additional CO2 emissions from use of fossil fuel and electricity in the project
            (e.g., fuel used by farm machines due to a need for stronger tractors or
            additional passes to close/treat the surface; fuel/electricity for irrigation
            pumps) shall be accounted for, unless project developer can demonstrate that
            fossil fuel/electricity used in the project scenario is less than or does not differ
            significantly from fossil fuel/electricity used in the baseline, in which case
            FUt-0 is considered 0.

-0 = [=1(,, - ,) + (,, - ,)]                                      (Eq. 3)

Where:

FUt-0 = emissions from increased fossil fuel and electricity use in the calculation

        period [tCO2e]

FUPR,y,a = emissions from use of fossil fuels in stratum y under the project

        scenario in year a of the calculation period [tCO2e]

FUBL,y = mean annual emissions from use of fossil fuels in stratum y under the

        baseline scenario [tCO2e]

EUPR,y,a = emissions from use of electricity in stratum y under the project scenario

        in year a of the calculation period [tCO2e]

EUBL,y = mean annual emissions from use of electricity in stratum y under the

        baseline scenario [tCO2e]

T       = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

5 IPCC 2019, Vol. 4 AFOLU, Table 11.1 (aggregated default value)

        Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                              17
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

10.3.2 |FUPR and FUBL shall be documented by the project developer and generally
            calculated with the equation below, based on fuel consumption by machine
            type and fuel emission factor.

,, =  ,,, × ,,                                                         (Eq. 4)

Where:

FUi,y,a = emissions from use of fossil fuels in stratum y in year a [tCO2e ha-1]

FULi,y,MT,a = fuel consumption in stratum y by the machinery type MT used in year

         a [litres]

FEFi,y,MT = emissions factor for the fuel used in stratum y in machinery MT [tCO2e
            litres-1]

MT       = machinery type (gasoline two-stroke, gasoline four-stroke, diesel)

i        = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For FUBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for five years prior to project start. If this is not
available, the amount of fuel combusted can be estimated using fuel efficiency
of the vehicle (e.g., l/100 km, l/tonne-km, l/hour) and the appropriate unit of
use for the selected fuel efficiency (e.g., kilometres [km] driven if efficiency is
given in l/100 km). If no adequate documentation can be provided, FUBL shall
be no more than 50% of FUPR.

Non-CO2 GHG emissions caused by the use of fossil fuel from the project (such
as management operations, machinery, etc.) are insignificant and may thus be
neglected.

10.3.3 |EUPR and EUBL shall be documented by the project developer and generally
            calculated with the equation below, based on electricity consumption by
            appliance and respective emission factor. If electricity is generated on-site
            using fossil fuels (e.g., in diesel generators for irrigation pumps), emissions
            from fuel combustion should be calculated instead, following the approach
            described above.

,, =  ,,, × ,,                                                         (Eq. 5)

Where:

EUi,y,a  = emissions from electricity consumption in stratum y in year a

         [tCO2e ha-1]

EUWi,y,SE,a = electricity consumption in stratum y from source SE in year a [kWh]

EEFi,y,SE = emissions factor for the electricity used in stratum y in source SE

         [tCO2e kWh-1]

SE       = electricity source type (grid, fossil fuel generator, etc)

         Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                        18
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

i          = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For EUBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for five years prior to project start. If no adequate
documentation can be provided, EUBL shall be no more than 50% of EUPR.

10.4 | Cover Crop Seed Production and Transport

10.4.1 |As applicability conditions for this Activity Module do not allow cover crops in
            the baseline scenario, emissions from seed production and transport (SPT) in
            the baseline scenario are considered 0. Change in emissions SPTt-0 thus
            equals emissions from seed production and transport in the project scenario
            SBTPR, calculated as follows:

- = [=1(,,)]                                                 (Eq. 6)

10.4.2 |Annual project emissions from seed production and transport SPTPR,y,a are
            calculated based on amount of seed per crop for each stratum:

,, = [(,,, × ,) × (,, + ,, × ,,,)](Eq. 7)

Where:

SPTPR,y,a = Emissions from seed production and transport in stratum y in year a

           of the project scenario [tCO2e]

SPR,y,a,c  = Amount of seed for crop c applied in stratum y in year a of the
           project scenario [kg ha-1]

APR,y      = Area in stratum y in the project scenario [ha]

EFSP,y,c   = Emission factor for production of seed for crop c applied in stratum y
           in year a of the project scenario [tCO2e kg-1]

EFST,y,c   = Emission factor for transport of seed for crop c applied in stratum y
           in year a of the project scenario [tCO2e km-1 kg-1]

DistSTPR,y,a,c = Transport distance for seed for crop c applied in stratum y in year a

           of the project scenario [km]

Amount of seed per crop SPR,y,a,c per stratum y shall be monitored and
documented for the project. If no detailed information is available for seed
crops, specifically for pre-mixed seeds, conservative and documented expert
opinion may be used to estimate average amounts for each cover crop species
applied in the mix.

Emission factors for seed production per crop EFSP,y,c shall be
documented for the project. If no specific emission factors are available for a
crop type, conservative default emission factors may be applied (e.g., based

           Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                   19
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

on emission factors or life cycle assessment (LCA) quantifications for related
crops. For details, see the monitoring requirements for EFSP,y,c in Section 12).

Emission factors for seed transport per seed type EFST,y,c shall be
documented for the project (if not already covered in LCA calculation for
EFSP,y,c). National values specific to the transport means (vehicle type,
capacity, etc.) shall be applied. If no national emission factors are available,
default emission factors can be applied conservatively (e.g., using tools or
emission factors published by the Greenhouse Gas Protocol6).

Seed transport distance from production to field (DistSTPR,y,a,c) shall be
documented based on field locations for each stratum y using verifiable
distance calculation, e.g., geographic information system (GIS)/map
distances. Average distance in each stratum weighted by field size shall be
used for calculation. If emission factor for seed production (EFSP,y,c) already
includes transportation (e.g., to distribution centers), the remaining transport
distance to the fields shall be calculated for DistPR,y,a,c. If different transport
types (air, sea, ground) are used, respective distances shall be calculated
separately, and respective emission factors (EFST,t,0) shall be applied.

10.5 |Other Agrochemical Emissions

10.5.1 |Additional agrochemical emissions (AE) related to the project from increased
            use of agrochemicals, especially pesticides or non-N fertilisers, shall be
            accounted for unless the project developer can demonstrate that
            agrochemicals used in the project scenario are less than or do not differ
            significantly from agrochemicals used in the baseline, in which case AEt-0 is
            considered 0.

10.5.2 |If use of agrochemicals (herbicides, pesticides) or non-N fertiliser is
            significantly higher in the project than in the baseline scenario, the project
            developer shall calculate respective emissions by using specific amounts and
            emission factors. Emission factors applied shall be based on manufacturer
            information or scientific sources.

-0 = [=1(,, - ,)]                                    (Eq. 8)

Where:

6 "Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools" (EF list) or "GHG Emissions from Transport or Mobile Sources"
  (calculation tool, results provided correspond to EFFT,t*DistFT,t) published at https://ghgprotocol.org/calculation-
  tools#cross_sector_tools_id (link accessed June 2021).

        Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                                    20
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

AEt-0 = additional emissions from project activity in the calculation period

        [tCO2e]

AEPR,y,a = other emissions in stratum y under the project scenario in year a of the

        calculation period [tCO2e]

AEBL,y = other emissions (annual mean) in stratum y under the baseline scenario

        [tCO2e]

T       = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

10.5.3 |AEPR and AEBL shall be documented for each emitter type (agrochemical) by
            the project developer and calculated with the equation below, based on
            emission type, underlying quantity, and respective emission factor.

,, =  ,,, × ,,                                            (Eq. 9)

Where:

AEi,y,a = emissions from use of other agrochemicals in stratum y in year a
            [tCO2e ha-1]

AQi,y,ET,a = quantity of agrochemicals in stratum y for emitter type ET applied in

        year a [kg]

AEFi,y,ET = emissions factor of the agrochemical used in stratum y (for emitter type
            ET) [tCO2e kg-1]

ET      = emitter type (specific pesticide, fertiliser, or other agrochemical)

i       = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

10.5.4 |For AEBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
            management records for five years prior to project start. If no adequate
            documentation can be provided, AEBL shall be no more than 50% of AEPR.

       Leakage

11.1.1 |Calculation of leakage shall follow the rules and equations in the Soil Organic
            Carbon Framework Methodology. If a reduction in yield is detected in a
            performance certification, it is assumed that the lost production capacity shall
            be made up for on land outside the project area. Emissions caused by such a
            shift shall be accounted for as leakage according to the equation in the Soil
            Organic Carbon Framework Methodology.

11.1.2 |Additional requirements: Under this Activity Module, leakage shall be
            assessed at stratum level. Instead of Equation 19 of the Soil Organic Carbon
            Framework Methodology, leakage shall thus be calculated for each stratum
            separately, using equation 10:

        Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                          21
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

LK-0   =    [,-,      ×  , ]  ×  (BC +,-0            +  ,-0  +  ,-0)(Eq.   10)

                   ,

Where:

LKt-0 = emissions due to shift of production to non-project lands (leakage area)

CYt,y     [tCO2e]
          = crop yield in stratum y at time t (5 year average*) [kg ha-1]

CYmin,y = lowest crop yield in stratum y in any calculation period since project start
            (5 year average*) [kg ha-1]

CYBL,y = crop yield in stratum y under the baseline scenario (5 year average*)
            [kg ha-1]

y,t       = eligible project area in stratum y (5-year average*) [ha]

BCLA = change in biomass carbon stocks in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

SOCLA,t-0 = change in soil organic carbon stocks in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

FELA,t-0 = change in emissions from use of fertiliser in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

FULA,t-0 = change in emissions from fuel use in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

     * If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles, crop yield
            and stratum area shall be calculated as the average across an equal length
            period.

       Monitoring

12.1.1 |Monitoring approach and parameters in the Soil Organic Carbon Framework
            Methodology shall be followed. Also, the project developer shall collect and
            document evidence that this Activity Module's applicability conditions are met
            at all times.

12.1.2 |Additional requirements: The following parameters shall be monitored in this
            Activity Module, depending on the quantification approach selected. Where
            parameters listed below overlap with the Soil Organic Carbon Framework
            Methodology monitoring section, the following descriptions shall be applied
            under this Activity Module to ensure stratum-level quantification and
            appropriate data sources.

            Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                    22
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       APR,y
                      Ha
Unit                  Area in stratum y in the project scenario
Description           Farm records (GPS data, GIS files)
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Documentation allowing unambiguous identification and
Measurement           documenting area size at field level
procedures            At project start; reviewed annually
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures      Used in Equation 7
Additional comments

Data/Parameter:       y,t

Unit                  Ha
Description           Area in stratum y at time t (five-year average*)

Source of data        Farm records (GPS data, GIS files)

Value(s) applied

Measurement           Documentation allowing unambiguous identification and
procedures            documenting area size at field level

Monitoring frequency  Annually (for calculation of five-year average*)

QA/QC procedures

Additional comments   Used in Equation 10

* If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles, area shall be

calculated as the average across an equal length period.

Data/Parameter:       AQi,y,ET,a
Unit                  Km
Description           Quantity of agrochemicals in stratum y for emitter type ET
                      applied in year a
Source of data        Farm records
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Documentation of quantity and type of non-N­fertiliser
procedures            agrochemicals used for cover crops (e.g., for termination)
Monitoring frequency  Annually
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   Used in Equation 9

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                 23
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       AEFi,y,ET
Unit                  tCO2e kg-1
Description           Emissions factor of the agrochemical used in stratum y (for
                      emitter type ET)
Source of data        Supplier information
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Supplier LCA information for production and transport
procedures            If no supplier information is available, national or international
                      default values or third-party emission factors (e.g., from
Monitoring frequency  applicable studies on respective crop emissions) may be applied.
QA/QC procedures      Annually
Additional comments
                      Used in Equation 9
Data/Parameter:
Unit                  CYBL,c,y
Description           kg ha-1
                      Average annual crop yield for crop type c per ha in stratum y in
Source of data        the project area during the baseline period (five-year average)
Value(s) applied      Farm records, e.g., field records, sales receipts
Measurement
procedures            Yield is recorded for each crop season and cumulated annually
                      (as sum of each crop type). For the baseline, an average annual
Monitoring frequency  yield calculated across the five-year baseline period.
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   Project start

                      This parameter replaces parameter CYBL in the Soil Organic
                      Carbon Framework Methodology (Equation 19).

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                        24
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       CYt,y
Unit
Description           kg ha-1

Source of data        Average annual crop yield per ha in stratum y in the project area
Value(s) applied      (five-year average*)
Measurement
procedures            Farm records, e.g., field records, sales receipts

                      Yield is recorded for each crop season and cumulated annually
                      (as sum of each crop type). Average annual yield is calculated for
                      each stratum across the five-year reporting period.
                      If cover crops are partially grazed or harvested (e.g., as feed or
                      biomass crop), this yield may be included in CYt,y and, as relevant
                      in quantification Approach 2 or 3, may be deducted from organic
                      inputs to the soil (i.e., the respective model parameter).

Monitoring frequency  * If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles,
QA/QC procedures      crop yield shall be calculated as the average across an equal
Additional comments   length period.
                      Annually

                      Used in equation 10. This parameter replaces parameter CYt in
                      the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology (Equation 19).

Data/Parameter:       CYmin,y
Unit                  kg ha-1
Description           Minimum annual crop yield per ha in stratum y since project start
Source of data        Farm records, e.g., field records, sales receipts
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Yield is recorded for each crop season and cumulated annually
procedures            (as sum of each crop type). CYmin,y represents lowest average
                      annual yield per stratum since project start and serves as
Monitoring frequency  threshold to assess yield reduction.
QA/QC procedures      Annually
Additional comments
                      Used in Equation 8. This parameter replaces parameter CYmin in
                      the Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology (Equation 19).

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                         25
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       DistSTPR,y,a,c
Unit                  km
Description           Transport distance for seed for crop c applied in stratum y in year
Source of data        a of the project scenario
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Seed transport distance from production to field shall be
procedures            documented based on field locations for each stratum y using
                      verifiable distance calculation, e.g., GIS/map distances. Average
Monitoring frequency  distance in each stratum weighted by field size shall be used for
QA/QC procedures      calculation. If emission factor for seed production (EFSP,y,c)
Additional comments   already includes transportation (e.g., to distribution centers), the
                      remaining transport distance to the fields shall be calculated for
Data/Parameter:       DistPR,y,a,c. If different transport types (air, sea, ground) are used,
Unit                  respective distances shall be calculated separately, and
Description           respective emission factors (EFST,t,0) shall be applied.
Source of data        Annually
Value(s) applied
                      Used in Equation 7
Measurement
procedures            EFFE,y
Monitoring frequency  tCO2e kgN-1
QA/QC procedures      Conversion factor for emissions from N fertiliser in stratum y
Additional comments   IPCC 2019
                      IPCC 2019 aggregated default value for EFFE is 0.01.
                      Disaggregated default values in IPCC 2019 Table 11.1 may be
                      used if fertiliser inputs are known per fertiliser type.

                      Project start

                      Used in Equation 2

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                             26
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       EFSP,y,c
Unit
Description           tCO2e kg-1
Source of data        Emission factor for production of seed for crop c applied in
Value(s) applied      stratum y in year a of the project scenario
Measurement           Seed producer information/product information
procedures
                      If no specific emission factors are available for a crop,
Monitoring frequency  conservative default emission factors may be applied, e.g.,
QA/QC procedures      emission factors from national sources, peer-reviewed scientific
Additional comments   publications or factors based on LCA quantifications for related
Data/Parameter:       (commercial) crops with comparable management practices (i.e.,
Unit                  fertiliser use and field management/tillage).
Description           Project start; updated annually
Source of data        The seed production emission factors shall be assessed by an
Value(s) applied      expert who shall be part of the VVB team at project validation.
Measurement           Used in Equation 7
procedures
                      EFST,y,c
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures      tCO2e km-1 kg-1
Additional comments   Emission factor for transport of seed for crop c applied in stratum
Data/Parameter:       y in year a of the project scenario
Unit                  National transport emission factors

                      Documented for the project (if not already covered in LCA
                      calculation for EFSP,y,c)
                      National values specific to the transport means (vehicle type,
                      capacity, etc.) shall be applied.
                      If no national emission factors are available, default emission
                      factors can be applied conservatively, e.g., by using tools or
                      emission factors published by the Greenhouse Gas Protocol:
                      Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools (EF list) or GHG
                      Emissions from Transport or Mobile Sources (calculation tool;
                      results provided correspond to EFFT,t*DistFT,t), published at
                      https://ghgprotocol.org/calculation-tools#cross_sector_tools_id
                      (link accessed June 2021).
                      Uncertainty of factor applied shall be determined based on
                      parameter source (e.g., scientific source for emission factor used
                      in tools listed above) or, if not available, conservatively assumed
                      to be 50%.
                      Project start; reviewed annually

                      Used in Equation 7

                      EEFi,y,SE

                      tCO2e kWh-1

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                         27
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Description           Emissions factor for the electricity used in stratum y in source SE
Source of data
                      a) National GHG inventory sources such as:
Value(s) applied           · U.S.: Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
Measurement                     (epa.gov)
procedures
Monitoring frequency  EU: EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2023 --
QA/QC procedures      European Environment Agency (europa.eu) and EMEP/EEA air
Additional comments   pollutant emission inventory (europa.eu)
                      b) If no national data is available, default emission factors in
Data/Parameter:
Unit                       IPCC 2006, Volume 2, Chapter 3, Table 3.3.1 may be applied
Description                (taking into account listed uncertainties).
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Project start; reviewed annually for national updates
Measurement
procedures            Used in Equation 5

Monitoring frequency  EUWi,y,SE,a
QA/QC procedures      kWh
Additional comments   Electricity consumption in stratum y from source SE in year a
                      Farm records

                           1) Document electric equipment and power source used for
                                cover cropping in each stratum.

                           2) Quantify electricity used for cover crop activity based on:
                                      a. Direct records (electricity documentation), or
                                      b. Duration of equipment use (hours) and power
                                           consumption per equipment type (kW).

                      Use-based documentation, aggregated (sum) per year

                      Used in Equation 5

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                         28
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       FEBL,y
Unit                  kgN
Description           Mean annual N fertiliser input in stratum y under the baseline
                      scenario
Source of data        Farm records (field level)
Value(s) applied      Average annual N input in stratum y, calculated across baseline
                      period (five years)
Measurement
procedures            Project start
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures      Used in Equation 2
Additional comments
                      FEPR,y,a
Data/Parameter:       kgN
Unit                  N fertiliser input in stratum y under the project scenario in year a
Description           Farm records (field level)
Source of data        Sum of N inputs in stratum y in year a
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Use-based; aggregated annually
procedures
Monitoring frequency  Used in Equation 2
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                          29
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       FEFi,y,MT
Unit                  tCO2e liters-1
Description           Emissions factor for the fuel used in stratum y in machinery MT
Source of data        a) National GHG inventory sources such as:

Value(s) applied           · U.S.: Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
Measurement                     (epa.gov)
procedures
Monitoring frequency       · Canada: Emission_Factors.pdf (ec.gc.ca)
QA/QC procedures           · EU: EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook
Additional comments
                                2023 -- European Environment Agency (europa.eu) and
Data/Parameter:                 EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory (europa.eu)
Unit
Description           b) If no national data is available, default emission factors in
Source of data             IPCC 2006, Volume 2, Chapter 3, Table 3.3.1 may be applied
Value(s) applied           (taking into account listed uncertainties).
Measurement
procedures            Project start; reviewed annually for national updates

Monitoring frequency  Used in Equation 4
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   FULi,y,MT,a
                      Liter
                      Fuel consumption in stratum y by the machinery type MT used in
                      year a
                      Farm records

                           1) Document machines and fuel type for equipment used for
                                cover cropping in each stratum.

                           2) Document amount of equipment use for cover crops from:
                                      a. Direct records (fuel use), or
                                      b. Equipment usage (hours or distance) and fuel
                                           consumption (liters/hour or liters/km).

                      Baseline: Project start
                      Project: Use-based documentation, aggregated (sum) per year

                      Used in Equation 4

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                      30
Soil Organic Activity Module for Cover Crops, v.1.0

Data/Parameter:       SPR,y,a,c
Unit                  kg ha-1
Description           Amount of seed for crop c applied in stratum y in year a of the
                      project scenario
Source of data        Farm records
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Document for each cover crop type separately.
procedures            If no detailed information is available for seed crops, specifically
                      for pre-mixed seeds, conservative and documented expert
Monitoring frequency  opinion may be used to estimate average amounts for each cover
QA/QC procedures      crop species applied in the mix.
Additional comments   Use-based documentation, aggregated (sum) per year

                      Used in Equation 7

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                          31
