 ACTIVITY MODULE METHODOLOGY

SOIL ORGANIC CARBON ACTIVITY MODULE FOR
ZERO TILLAGE

SDG 13

PUBLICATION DATE 20.02.2024
VERSION 1.0
NEXT PLANNED UPDATE 19.02.2027
RELATED DOCUMENTS
­ v. 1.0 Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology

CONTACT DETAILS

The Gold Standard Foundation
International Environment House 2
Chemin de Balexert 7-9
1219 Châtelaine Geneva, Switzerland
Tel +41 22 788 70 80
Email help@goldstandard.org

                                        Climate Security and Sustainable Development
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

SUMMARY

This Soil Organic Carbon (SOC) Activity Module focuses on zero tillage/no-till practice,
an agricultural technique for growing crops or pasture without mechanically disturbing
the soil through tillage. It is applicable globally.

Zero tillage is an effective greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation approach which
accumulates and avoids emission of SOC (Ogle et al. 2005 and Derpsch et al. 2010).
Cooper et al. (2021) assessed carbon change to a soil depth of 50 centimetres (cm)
and demonstrated that long-term zero tillage has the dual benefits of mitigating
potential soil carbon dioxide (CO2) fluxes, increasing methane (CH4) oxidation, and
enhancing carbon storage through a reduction in soil porosity whilst reducing the risk
of runoff during heavy rainfall through development of a highly effective, well-
connected porosity. Ogle et al. (2019) report a sufficient amount of SOC in the topsoil
to enhance the amount of SOC across the entire soil profile in sandy soils of tropical
moist/wet, tropical dry, warm temperate moist, and cool temperate moist climates as
well as loamy, silty, and clayey soils in tropical moist/wet, warm, and cool temperate
moist climates.

Of particular significance to farmers is the role of long-term zero tillage in improving
soil quality through:

    - increased microbial biomass and earthworm activity (Cooper et al. 2021, Pelosi
         et al. 2009, Stroud, J. L. 2020),

    - prevention of soil erosion (Nearing et al. 2017, Derpsch et al. 2010),
    - improvement of the nutrient cycling (Triplett and Dick 2008),
    - conservation of water in the soil through improving infiltration and reducing

         evaporation (Palm et al. 2014, Pittelkow et al. 2015a),
    - creation of greater aggregate stability (Fernandez et al. 2010), and
    - contribution to ensuring food security (Ogle et al. 2019).
In addition, GHG emissions are reduced through the decreased use of fossil fuels in field
preparation.

In line with the Gold Standard for the Global Goals Soil Organic Carbon Framework
Methodology (hereafter SOC Framework Methodology), this SOC Activity Module only
accounts for benefits in the SOC pool. No other pools or emission reductions, e.g. in
nitrous oxide (N2O) due to reduced fertilizer need or reduced fossil fuel use, can be
accounted for as benefits.

In the baseline situation, a farmer applies conventional or conservation tillage practices
in which soil disturbance is caused by applying instruments such as harrows,
mouldboard ploughs, offset harrows, subsoilers, and rippers for extensive seedbed
preparation in a conventional tillage approach or less soil disturbance following a
reduced tillage approach applying chisels, sweeps, and/or discs. The project introduces
the zero tillage/no-till practice, which applies direct seeding of crops in a field without
mechanical disturbance of the soil.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                 2
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

This SOC Activity Module is limited to two of the three approaches for quantification of
SOC increase which are listed in the SOC Framework Methodology. Due to variability in
research results on impacts of no-till on SOC, this SOC Activity Module focuses on
Approach 1, which requires on-site measurements to directly document pre-project and
project SOC stock levels. Nevertheless, more research findings, data, and proven
modelling approaches are released daily for specific applications of zero tillage, and
globally leading GHG and agricultural institutions such as the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC),1 the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)2 of the United
Nations, the World Resources institute (WRI),3 the World Business Council for
Sustainable Development (WBCSD),4 and the European Conservation Agriculture
Foundation (ECAF)5 continue to promote zero tillage practices. Therefore, this SOC
Activity Module also allows Approach 2, which applies project-specific datasets,
parameters, and/or models to quantify baseline and project SOC stock levels, with
strong requirements for application at the project level, including verification
measurements for baseline and project impact. This SOC Activity Module does not allow
Approach 3 (IPCC defaults) as described in the SOC Framework Methodology.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

TREES Consulting                Agoro Carbon Alliance US Inc.
Sihleggstrasse 32               100 North Tampa Street, Suite 3200
8832 Wollerau                   Tampa, Florida 33602
Switzerland                     USA

1 https://www.ipcc.ch
2 https://www.fao.org/home/en/
3 https://www.wri.org
4 https://www.wbcsd.org
5 https://ecaf.org

                   Climate Security and Sustainable Development                           3
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

TABLE OF CONTENTS

    SUMMARY........................................................................................................... 2
             DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................... 5
             SCOPE, APPLICABILITY, AND ENTRY INTO FORCE ............................................... 5
             2.1 | SCOPE ............................................................................................. 5
             2.2 | APPLICABLITY ................................................................................... 5
             2.3 | ENTRY INTO FORCE ........................................................................... 7
             ADDITIONALITY ............................................................................................ 7
             PROJECT BOUNDARIES................................................................................... 7
             4.1 | Spatial Boundary ............................................................................... 7
             4.2 | Temporal Boundary............................................................................ 8
             4.3 | Carbon Pools .................................................................................... 8
             4.4 | Greenhouse Gases ............................................................................. 9
             EMISSION REDUCTION QUANTIFICATION APPROACH .......................................... 9
             5.1 | Approaches for Baseline and Project Scenario Quantification ..................... 9
             5.2 | Approach 1 (On-Site Measurements of SOC) .......................................... 9
             5.3 | Approach 2 (Application of Models, Research data) .................................11
             BASELINE SCENARIO ....................................................................................12
             6.1 | Baseline Calculations .........................................................................12
             PROJECT SCENARIO .....................................................................................12
             7.1 | Project Calculations...........................................................................12
             PROCEDURES FOR CALCULATION APPROACH CHANGE........................................13
             UNCERTAINTY .............................................................................................13
                OTHER EMISSIONS ....................................................................................13
             10.1 | Project emissions..............................................................................13
             10.2 | Increased Nitrogen Fertilizer Input.......................................................14
             10.3 | Increased Combustion of Fossil Fuels and Electricity Use .........................15
             10.4 | Other Agrochemical Emissions ............................................................16
                LEAKAGE .................................................................................................17
                MONITORING ...........................................................................................18
             a. Data and Parameters fixed:......................................................................18
             b. Data and Parameters monitored ................................................................20
                REFERENCES ............................................................................................25

      DOCUMENT HISTORY ..........................................................................................26

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                                                 4
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

DEFINITIONS

1.1.1 | Terms and definitions are listed in the SOC Framework Methodology and
            GS4GG Glossary. In addition, the following module-specific definitions apply:

Term           Definition
Zero Tillage/  Zero tillage/no-till is an agricultural technique for growing
No-Till        crops or pasture without mechanically disturbing the soil
               through tillage (including disturbance from non-turning tillage
Conventional   such as rippers and disc harrows). Crop is sown directly into
Tillage        soil that has not been tilled since the harvest of the previous
               crop. This technique has more than 30% coverage of the soil
Conservation   surface with residues.
Tillage        Seedbed preparation using cultivation instruments such as
               harrows, mouldboard ploughs, offset harrows, subsoilers, and
               rippers. Conventional tillage methods, involving extensive
               seedbed preparation, cause the greatest soil disturbance and
               leave little plant residue on the surface.
               Conservation tillage includes any form of minimum or reduced
               tillage in which residue, mulch, or sod is left on the soil surface
               to protect soil and conserve moisture. After planting, at least
               30% of the soil surface remains covered by residue to reduce
               soil erosion by water.

SCOPE, APPLICABILITY, AND ENTRY INTO FORCE

2.1 | SCOPE

2.1.1 | This activity module is applicable to project activities that introduces zero
            tillage/no-till practice, an agricultural technique for growing crops or pasture
            without mechanically disturbing the soil through tillage.

2.2 | APPLICABLITY

2.2.1 | Projects applying this SOC Activity Module shall comply with the applicability
            conditions that are specified below and are within the SOC Framework
            Methodology. In addition, projects shall comply with applicable Land Use &
            Forests Activity Requirements (hereafter LUF Activity Requirements) and the
            Gold Standard for the Global Goals Principles & Requirements (hereafter
            Principles & Requirements).

2.2.2 | Applicability conditions specific to this SOC Activity Module:
            a. Geographic location ­ The activity module is applicable globally.
            b. Project area ­
                      i. Generally, entire farms or selected fields/areas of a farm are
                             eligible (see Section 4.1: Spatial Boundary).

               Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                   5
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

         ii. The methodology shall not be applicable to farms which have been
                 applying zero tillage techniques in more than one full rotation cycle
                 in the baseline period prior to project start, even if such
                 application was on fields not included in the project. For single
                 crop systems, baseline practices shall not include more than two
                 subsequent years of zero tillage practices. In the baseline period,
                 at least one tillage event (soil disturbance) shall be no less than
                 two years prior to project start.

c. Zero tillage refers to practices on arable land for which no tillage is applied
    between harvest and sowing. Crop is sown directly into soil that has not
    been tilled since the harvest of the previous crop. At least 30% of the soil
    surface remains covered by residue to reduce soil erosion by water.

d. Soil type ­

       i. Proposed projects on sites with organic soils (Histosols), as defined
              by the World Reference Base for Soil Resources (FAO 2015), are
              ineligible. While no-till practices can reduce C losses from organic
              soils, they shall not commonly lead to an increase in soil carbon as
              targeted by this SOC Activity Module. Thus, only mineral soil types
              are eligible.

e. In line with the SOC Framework Methodology, any reduction in crop yield
    which can be attributed to the project activity shall be avoided. To date,
    the majority of studies report little or no difference in yield between the
    zero and conventional tillage managements (Shakoor et al. 2021, Huang
    et al. 2018). However, it has been reported that yields in the first one to
    two years following zero tillage implementation can decline (Pittelkow et
    al. 2015b). This SOC Activity Module thus requires monitoring whether the
    project activity impacts crop yields, calculated as the five-year average.
    Reductions of more than 5% in five-year average yield during the crediting
    period shall be accounted for as leakage (see Section 11). An exception to
    this may be allowed for reductions in the first three years after project
    start to allow refinement of practices, subject to review at verification.

f. In line with the SOC Framework Methodology, this SOC Activity Module
    only accounts for benefits in the SOC pool. No other pools or emission
    reductions (e.g. in N2O due to reduced fertilizer need) can be accounted
    for as benefits.

g. No reversal to conventional or reduced tillage practices is allowed on the
    project area fields. This explicitly prohibits tillage rotation approaches
    applying periodic tillage runs between or after several years of zero tillage
    during the crediting period.

h. Organic carbon inputs to the field (other than on-field crop residue) shall
    not be changed as part of the project activity by more than 5% from
    baseline period average.
    Exception: If this activity module is stacked with an additional Gold
    Standard methodology or activity module which uses the same
    quantification approach in the project (measurement or compatible SOC

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                            6
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

                 model allowing distinction of impacts between zero tillage and organic
                 inputs) and considers respective leakage effects, this applicability condition
                 may be omitted.
            i. If project activity includes change of other agricultural practices impacting
                 SOC (e.g. cover crops, organic inputs), the same quantification approach
                 (measurements and/or models) shall be used for all activities and shall be
                 fully aligned to ensure that overall benefits are quantified correctly and not
                 double-counted.
            j. Application of herbicides to prepare fields and/or terminate crops shall be
                 minimized, and negative environmental impacts shall be prevented, in
                 accordance with Gold Standard Principle 9.6. Use of herbicides related to
                 project activities, specifically for crop termination and weed control, shall
                 not be increased by more than 5% from baseline period average.

2.3 | ENTRY INTO FORCE

2.3.1 | The date of entry into force of this activity module is dd/02/2024.

      ADDITIONALITY

3.1.1 | The regulatory surplus shall be demonstrated by all the projects, irrespective
            of scale. The project shall demonstrate that proposed activity is neither
            directly mandated by law nor otherwise triggered by legal requirements (e.g.,
            legally binding agreements, covenants, consent decrees, or contracts (with
            government agencies or private parties). If such legal requirements are
            identified, then crediting for the activity shall only be allowed until the date
            the legal requirements take effect.

3.1.2 | All projects seeking Gold Standard certification shall demonstrate that they
            would not have been implemented without the benefits of carbon revenue.
            Specific rules and guidelines on how to assess additionality can be found in
            the Additionality section in the latest version of the Gold Standard SOC
            Framework Methodology..

      PROJECT BOUNDARIES

4.1 | Spatial Boundary

4.1.1 | For spatial boundaries, the rules and requirements defined in the SOC
            Framework Methodology apply.

4.1.2 | Spatial boundary description specific to this SOC Activity Module:
            a. Generally, entire farms or selected fields/areas of a farm are eligible. If
                 project activities are only implemented on selected fields, all applicability
                 conditions and requirements from the SOC Framework Methodology and
                 from this SOC Activity Module shall be applied to these specific fields.
                 These fields shall remain in the project during the entire crediting period

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                     7
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

    (i.e. no change of participating fields within a farm during the crediting
    period is allowed).

b. This SOC Activity Module requires GHG sources, sinks, and reservoirs
    (SSR) as identified in Figure 4-01 to be considered, with a focus on their
    impact on SOC and increase of emissions from project activities. The
    boundary thus includes all impacted field activities (machine use, tillage,
    and application of fertilizer and pesticides). Since SOC increase from zero
    tillage is also driven through inputs of biomass (root and residue), residue
    management for all crops is essential to assess SOC impact. For the same
    reason, other organic inputs (e.g. manure, compost) have to be
    monitored. Since no changes are expected to be made to farm
    infrastructure or handling of main crops, these activities are not included
    in the project boundary for quantification.

                                   Farm facilities                         Farm facilities construction,
                                                                      operations,* and decommissioning
                                         Farm equipment manufacture
                                                 and transportation*

Off-field activity                 On-field activity                  Fertilizer application
           Fertilizer production*           Crop residue management   Pesticide application
                                                       Machine use
                                                     Organic inputs             Tillage

Project-controlled SSR             Post-harvest processing                Crop processing
Project-related SSR                                  Crop transport
Excluded SSR

Materials/products flow

* Fertilizer production, farm equipment, and facilities operations are excluded under the assumption that no
      significant change to these emissions results from implementation of the project activity.

                                   Figure 4-01: Spatial project boundary

4.2 | Temporal Boundary

4.2.1 | The maximum crediting period allowed under this Activity Module is 10 years
            The crediting period renewal at the end of 5th year is required as per
            Principles and requirements.

4.3 | Carbon Pools

4.3.1 | Carbon pool description:
            a. In line with the SOC Framework Methodology, this SOC Activity Module
                 only accounts for benefits in the SOC pool. Additional pools (e.g. biomass
                 and litter) may be used for calculation of SOC change, but no GHG

                                   Climate Security and Sustainable Development                               8
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

                 sequestration in pools other than soil carbon shall be accounted for as
                 benefits.
            b. No emission reduction from other GHG sources (e.g. fossil fuel use or
                 fertilizer application) shall be reported for benefits under this methodology.
                 To account for emission reductions from reduced fuel use or fertilizer
                 application, a separate Gold Standard methodology may be applied.

4.4 | Greenhouse Gases

4.4.1 | Following the SOC Framework Methodology, all GHG sinks and sources
            affected by its activities shall be monitored.

4.4.2 | For this SOC Activity Module, this specifically includes any significant
            increases in CO, CH4, and NO emissions from project activities.

      EMISSION REDUCTION QUANTIFICATION APPROACH

Calculations for overall benefits follow the equations set out in the Emissions
Reduction Quantification Approaches section of the SOC Framework Methodology.
Sections below describe the approaches and calculations specific to this SOC Activity
Module.

5.1 | Approaches for Baseline and Project Scenario Quantification

5.1.1 | This SOC Activity Module allows application of quantification Approaches 1 and
            2, as described in the SOC Framework Methodology. It does not allow
            application of Approach 3 (default equations and parameters). Project
            developers shall select the most specific approach possible with the data
            available, as outlined in the decision tree in Figure 2 of the SOC Framework
            Methodology.

5.2 | Approach 1 (On-Site Measurements of SOC)

5.2.1 | Additional requirements:
            a. SOC measurements shall be taken at a suitable time of year, e.g. at the
                 beginning of the season for main crops, with repeated measurements
                 performed at the same time of year to avoid bias due to short-term
                 variation in soil carbon pools. The project documentation shall specify the
                 timing of soil sampling, i.e. the season and crop rotation phase, as
                 applicable, to be implemented by all farms participating in the project or
                 program.
            b. To avoid overestimation of SOC stocks, measurements shall always be
                 performed before any significant carbon inputs, such as organic or partially
                 organic fertilizers, including compost and manure, as well as other carbon
                 sources (e.g. in lime or other soil inputs).
            c. In line with the SOC Framework Methodology, soil samples shall be
                 collected to a depth of 50 cm.
            d. Since sampling constitutes a disturbance in the zero tillage field, the
                 project description shall include an approach to avoid repeated sampling at

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                     9
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

                 the same position (e.g. by adequately marking sampling sites after closure
                 or recording exact GPS coordinates and prescribing a minimum distance
                 for the next sampling round).

            e. As introduction of zero tillage practices can lead to soil compaction, bulk
                 density must be considered in all quantification approaches. Quantification
                 is to be done on an equivalent mass basis to properly quantify carbon
                 impacts, i.e. if increased bulk density is measured in the project scenario,
                 respective layer depth shall be reduced proportionally when calculating
                 SOC change.

            f. Special care shall be taken to ensure that superficial litter (crop residue) is
                 not included in the SOC quantification.

5.2.2 | Alternative SOC quantification approaches beyond physical sampling and
            chemical laboratory analysis, such as proximal sensing (in situ) or lab
            spectroscopy approaches may be used in projects if such approaches are
            approved by Gold Standard at the level of Activity Requirement. Application of
            such SOC quantification is subject to scientific proof that the results obtained
            under project conditions6 do not show significant differences to the laboratory
            results to a soil depth of 50 cm. Revalidation of measurements in the project
            area shall be undertaken in accordance with LUF Activity Requirements.

            If a new technology has not been tested under comparable conditions, a
            project may establish project-specific datasets to test the accuracy of the
            technology. This testing shall include repeated SOC stock measurements in at
            least two points in time, with each sample quantified with the new technology
            and parallel laboratory analysis. If a system (re)calibration is needed,
            separate datasets shall be used for calibration of the technology and
            validation for the project site. Upon confirmation of accuracy for
            measurements with the new technology, the project shall request a design
            change and get approval from Gold Standard to start using the alternative
            technology (subject to potential additional guidance in LUF Activity
            Requirements). After confirmation by Gold Standard, the project may use the
            new technology for quantification.

            In any case, uncertainty of the SOC quantification under project conditions
            shall have to be considered according to Gold Standard Uncertainty
            Requirements and following an Uncertainty Assessment as outlined in the SOC
            Framework Methodology.

6 Refer to stratification criteria (Section 7.1.4) for factors determining applicability to project
  conditions. All factors listed for stratification shall be assessed to confirm applicability.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                         10
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

5.3 | Approach 2 (Application of Models, Research data)

5.3.1 | Additional requirements:
            a. Project developers shall provide evidence that calculation approaches,
                 datasets, parameters, and models from peer-reviewed publications to
                 estimate baseline and project SOC stocks in the project are conservative
                 and applicable to the project site conditions and management practices.7
            b. Models and datasets applied must be calibrated locally, i.e. using project-
                 specific data. Global models without such local parametrization and
                 validation shall not be applied. Application of global defaults for soil
                 respiration, e.g. Q10 values to quantify temperature effects on respiration,
                 is not allowed.
            c. Project documentation shall include evidence that the sources used are
                 applicable to main crops and levels of yield (production intensity) as well
                 as management practices (including tillage practice) in the project area for
                 baseline and project scenarios. Evidence shall also be provided that
                 datasets and models have sufficient temporal resolution (i.e. multiple data
                 points per year) to account for impacts of seasonal variations in practices
                 and other factors such as changing weather conditions.
            d. Parameters for process-based models shall be calibrated and verified
                 following best practice, using at least five years of data for calibration and
                 three years of independent data for verification. Both calibration and
                 verification datasets shall match project conditions as outlined above. Any
                 gaps in datasets and procedures how gaps were addressed for the model
                 calibration and verification shall be reported at validation.
            e. SOC measurements for a representative sample in each stratum of the
                 project area shall be made at project start and at least once every five
                 years, applying proven methodology (see Section 5.2.2) and used to
                 statistically assess model results or research data used for quantification.
                 If significant differences from modelled results or research data are found,
                 the models shall be refined.

7 Refer to stratification criteria (Section 7.1.4) for factors determining applicability to project conditions. All factors
  listed for stratification shall be assessed to confirm applicability.

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                                                 11
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

      BASELINE SCENARIO

6.1 | Baseline Calculations

6.1.1 | Quantification for SOC in the baseline (SOCBL,y) shall follow the rules,
            approaches, calculations, and parameters set out in the Baseline Scenario
            section of the SOC Framework Methodology.

6.1.2 | Baseline data is required for five years as required by the SOC Framework
            Methodology. If five-year baseline data is not fully available for a field within a
            stratum (e.g. as it was leased less than five years prior to project start),
            evidence shall be provided that average baseline conditions for the stratum
            apply to the field lacking data, referencing the stratification criteria described
            below.

6.1.3 | Baseline period may be extended to cover full rotation periods; respectively
            avoid including fragments of rotations in the baseline quantification (e.g. in a
            three-year crop rotation system, a six-year baseline period shall deliver more
            consistent results, including all relevant practices, inputs and crop yields for
            two full rotation periods).

6.1.4 | To determine the baseline of the eligible project area, the land shall be
            stratified into modelling units (MUs) according to criteria set out in Section 6
            of the SOC Framework Methodology. In addition, the following criteria shall be
            considered in stratification:
            · Mineral soil type
            · Tillage practices (e.g. tillage depth, frequency, tillage equipment)
            · Specific crops (or crop rotations) and production periods
            For each stratum, SOC measurements shall be performed (Approach 1)
            and/or model parameters identified and verified (Approach 2).

6.1.5 | If a model is used to quantify baseline SOC (Approach 2), full transparency
            shall be provided on input data, parametrization, and quantification approach.
            Application of "black box" models is not allowed.

      PROJECT SCENARIO

7.1 | Project Calculations

7.1.1 | Quantification for SOC in the project scenario (SOCt,y) shall follow the rules,
            approaches, calculations, and parameters set out in the Project Scenario
            section of the SOC Framework Methodology.

7.1.2 | This SOC Activity Module addresses change to zero tillage practices.
            Quantifications shall consider all changes in practices (including changes to
            crop management, fertilization, and application of other agrochemicals). For
            model application (Approach 2), calculation and parameter must be adapted
            to the specific project situation.

7.1.3 | If other agricultural activities besides zero tillage are introduced in a project
            (e.g. cover crops, organic inputs), interactions shall be considered by applying
            the same SOC quantification approaches (Approach 1 or 2). If models are

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                     12
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

            applied (Approach 2), they shall specifically cover all activities in the project
            scenario.
7.1.4 | For the project scenario, the eligible project area shall be stratified into MUs
            according to criteria set out in Section 7 of the SOC Framework Methodology.
            In addition, the following criteria shall be considered in stratification.

            · Mineral soil type
            · Tillage practices (zero tillage)

            · Specific crops (or crop rotations) and production periods
            For each stratum, SOC measurements shall be performed (Approach 1)
            and/or model parameters identified and verified (Approach 2).
7.1.5 | If a model is used to quantify project SOC (Approach 2), full transparency
            shall be provided on input data, parametrization, and quantification approach.
            Application of "black box" models is not allowed.

      PROCEDURES FOR CALCULATION APPROACH CHANGE

8.1.1 | Any approach change between baseline and project scenario calculations shall
            be in compliance with requirements of section 8: Procedure for approach
            change of SOC Framework Methodology.

      UNCERTAINTY

9.1.1 | Calculation of uncertainty shall follow the rules and equations set out in the
            SOC Framework Methodology.

9.1.2 | If no information on Standard deviation (SD) or Standard error (SE) is known
            for a parameter, SE of 50% of the parameter value shall be assumed. For the
            calculations of the upper and lower confidence intervals, a t-value of 3 shall
            be applied. Exceptions to this rule are accepted default values considered
            constant (e.g. physical conversion rates, global warming potentials).

OTHER EMISSIONS

10.1 | Project emissions

10.1.1 |Significant additional GHG emissions (>5% total) due to the project activity
            need to be accounted for. For this SOC Activity Module, this explicitly includes
            increased fertilizer input, fuel and electricity use, and other agrochemical
            emissions (AE).

10.1.2 |As such emissions may differ between strata, calculation for this SOC Activity
            Module shall follow the rules and Equations 1 through 7 that are described
            below, which replace the area-wide calculation set out in Equations 12
            through 18 of the SOC Framework Methodology. They follow the same
            approach but allow application of different emission factors and quantities for
            different strata.

-0 = -0 + -0 + -0                                         (1)

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                   13
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

Where:

PEt-0   = emissions from project activities in the calculation period [tCO2e]
FEt-0   = emissions from increased fertilizer use in the calculation period [tCO2e]
FUt-0   = emissions from increased fuel and electricity use in the calculation
        period [tCO2e]
AEt-0   = other agrochemical emissions in the calculation period [tCO2e]

10.2 | Increased Nitrogen Fertilizer Input

10.2.1 |Emissions from increased nitrogen (N) fertilizer input in project scenario as

compared to the baseline scenario are calculated as follows. No differentiation

is made between synthetic and organic N fertilizer. This equation shall not be

applied for reductions in N fertilizer input, in which case FEt-0 is considered 0.
To account for reductions in fertilizer input and the respective GHG emissions

reductions, a separate Gold Standard methodology shall be applied.

-0 = [, × =1(,, - ,)]                                               (2)

Where:

FEt-0 = emissions from increased fertilizer use in the calculation period [tCO2e].

        Must be  0 in this methodology (i.e. no accounting of reductions).

FEPR,y,a = N fertilizer input in stratum y under the project scenario in year a of the

        calculation period [kgN]

FEBL,y = mean annual N fertilizer input in stratum y under the baseline scenario

        [kgN]

T       = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

EFFE,y  = Conversion factor for emissions from N fertilizer in stratum y [tCO2e
        kgN-1]. IPCC 2019 aggregated default value8 for EFFE is 0.01.

        Disaggregated default values in IPCC 2019 Table 11.1 may be used if

        fertilizer inputs are known per fertilizer type.

FEPR and FEBL shall be documented by the project developer. For FEBL, mean
annual input is calculated based on respective management records for five
years prior to project start. If no adequate documentation can be provided,
FEBL shall be no more than 50% of FEPR.

8 IPCC 2019, Vol 4 AFOLU, Table 11.1 (Aggregated default value)

               Climate Security and Sustainable Development                             14
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

10.3 |Increased Combustion of Fossil Fuels and Electricity Use

10.3.1 |Additional CO2 emissions from use of fossil fuel and electricity in project
            activities (e.g. fuel used by farm machines due to needs for stronger tractors
            or additional passes to close/treat the surface or fuel/electricity for irrigation
            pumps) need to be accounted for unless project developer can demonstrate
            that the fossil fuel/electricity used in the project scenario is less than or does
            not differ significantly from fossil fuel/electricity used in the baseline, in which
            case FUt-0 is considered 0.

-0 = [=1(,, - ,) + (,, - ,)]                                    (3)

Where:

FUt-0 = emissions from increased fossil fuel and electricity use in the calculation

        period [tCO2e]

FUPR,y,a = emissions from use of fossil fuels in stratum y under the project

        scenario in year a of the calculation period [tCO2e]

FUBL,y = mean annual emissions from use of fossil fuels in stratum y under the

        baseline scenario [tCO2e]

EUPR,y,a = emissions from use of electricity in stratum y under the project scenario

        in year a of the calculation period [tCO2e]

EUBL,y = mean annual emissions from use of electricity in stratum y under the

        baseline scenario [tCO2e]

T       = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

10.3.2 |FUPR and FUBL shall be documented by the project developer and generally
            calculated with the equation below, based on fuel consumption by machine

type and fuel emission factor.

,, =  ,,, × ,,                                                  (4)

Where:

FUi,y,a = emissions from use of fossil fuels in stratum y in year a [tCO2e ha-1]

FULi,y,MT,a = fuel consumption in stratum y by the machinery type MT used in year

        a [litres]

FEFi,y,MT = emissions factor for the fuel used in stratum y in machinery MT [tCO2e
            litres-1]

MT      = machinery type (gasoline two-stroke, gasoline four-stroke, diesel)

i       = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For FUBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for five years prior to project start. If this is not
available, the amount of fuel combusted can be estimated using fuel efficiency
(for example l/100 kilometres (km), l/tonne-km, l/hour) of the vehicle and the
appropriate unit of use for the selected fuel efficiency (e.g. km driven if

        Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                              15
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

efficiency is given in l/100 km). If no adequate documentation can be
provided, FUBL shall be no more than 50% of FUPR.

Non-CO2 GHG emissions caused by the use of fossil fuel from project activities
(management operations, machinery, etc.) are insignificant and may thus be
neglected.

10.3.3 |EUPR and EUBL shall be documented by the project developer and generally
            calculated with the equation below, based on electricity consumption by
            appliance and respective emission factor. If electricity is generated on-site
            using fossil fuels (e.g. in diesel generators for irrigation pumps), emissions
            from fuel combustion shall be calculated instead, following the approach
            described above.

,, =  ,,, × ,,                                                                   (5)

Where:

EUi,y,a    = emissions from electricity consumption in stratum y in year a [tCO2e
           ha-1]

EUWi,y,SE,a = electricity consumption in stratum y from source SE in year a [kWh]

EEFi,y,SE  = emissions factor for the electricity used in stratum y in source SE
           [tCO2e kWh-1]

SE         = electricity source type (grid, fossil fuel generator, etc)

i          = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For EUBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for five years prior to project start. If no adequate
documentation can be provided, EUBL shall be no more than 50% of EUPR.

10.4 | Other Agrochemical Emissions

10.4.1 |Additional AE related to the project activities from increased use of

agrochemicals, especially pesticides or non-N fertilizers, need to be accounted

for unless the project developer can demonstrate that agrochemicals used in

the project scenario are less than or do not differ significantly from

agrochemicals used in the baseline, in which case AEt-0 is considered 0.

10.4.2 |If use of agrochemicals (herbicides, pesticides) or non-N fertilizer is

significantly higher in the project than in the baseline scenario, the project
developer shall calculate respective emissions by using specific amounts and

emission factors. Emission factors applied shall be based on manufacturer

information or scientific sources.

-0 = [=1(,, - ,)]                                                        (6)

Where:

  AEt-0 = additional emissions from project activity in the calculation period
               [tCO2e]

           Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                     16
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

AEPR,y,a = other emissions in stratum y under the project scenario in year a of the

            calculation period [tCO2e]

AEBL,y = other emissions (annual mean) in stratum y under the baseline scenario

            [tCO2e]

T           = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

10.4.3 |AEPR and AEBL shall be documented for each emitter type (agrochemical) by
            the project developer and calculated with the equation below, based on

emission type, underlying quantity, and respective emission factor.

,, =  ,,, × ,,                                                                    (7)

Where:

AEi,y,a     = emissions from use of other agrochemicals in stratum y in year a
            [tCO2e ha-1]

AQi,y,ET,a = quantity of agrochemicals in stratum y for emitter type ET applied in

            year a [kg]

AEFi,y,ET = emissions factor of the agrochemical used in stratum y (for emitter type
            ET) [tCO2e kg-1]

ET          = emitter type (specific pesticide, fertilizer, or other agrochemical)

i           = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

10.4.4 |For AEBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
            management records for five years prior to project start. If no adequate
            documentation can be provided, AEBL shall be no more than 50% of AEPR.

LEAKAGE

11.1.1 |Calculation of leakage shall follow the rules and equations set out in the SOC
            Framework Methodology. If a reduction in yield is detected in a performance
            certification, it is assumed that the lost production capacity has to be made
            up for on land outside the project area. Emissions caused by such a shift shall
            be accounted for as leakage according to the equation listed in the SOC
            Framework Methodology. Note that accounting of positive leakage is not
            allowed according to the SOC Framework Methodology.

11.1.2 |Additional requirements: Under this SOC Activity Module, leakage shall be
            assessed at stratum level. Instead of Equation 19 in the SOC Framework
            Methodology, leakage shall thus be calculated for each stratum separately,
            using Equation 8:

LK-0     =    [  [,-,      ;  0]  ×  , ]  ×               (BC  +  ,-0  +  ,-0  +  ,-0)  (8)

                        ,

Where:      = emissions due to shift of production to non-project lands (leakage area)
  LKt-0     [tCO2e]

              Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                   17
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

CYt,y = crop yield in stratum y at time t (five-year average*) [kg ha-1]

CYmin,y = lowest crop yield (five-year average**) in stratum y in any calculation
            period since project start [kg ha-1]

CYBL,y = crop yield in stratum y under the baseline scenario (five-year average*)
            [kg ha-1]

y,t  = eligible project area in stratum y (five-year average*) [ha]

BCLA = emissions from change in biomass carbon stocks in leakage area
            [tCO2e ha-1]

SOCLA,t-0 = emissions from change in SOC stocks in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]
FELA,t-0 = change in emissions from use of fertilizer in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]
FULA,t-0 = change in emissions from fuel use in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

 * If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles, crop yield
        and stratum area shall be calculated as the average across an equal length
        period. In the project scenario, the five-year average shall be calculated as
        a running average from year t-4 to year t (for longer baseline periods,
        averaging period shall be increased accordingly).

** Baseline years shall be in included in CYmin for the project period (i.e. in
        project year 1, CYmin = CYBL).

      MONITORING

12.1.1 |Monitoring approach and parameters shall be followed as set out in the SOC
            Framework Methodology. Also, the project developer shall collect and
            document evidence that this SOC Activity Module's applicability conditions are
            met at all times and that project activity has been implemented as stated,
            specifically that no tillage events have occurred. Acceptable evidence are
            detailed field reports listing key interventions, dates and machinery used,
            remote sensing analysis of vegetation, and crop residue cover or time-
            stamped photographs of fields before, during, and after the cropping season,
            including fallow periods as applicable.

12.1.2 |Additional requirements: The following parameters shall be monitored in this
            SOC Activity Module, depending on the quantification approach selected.
            Where the parameters listed below overlap with the SOC Framework
            Methodology Monitoring section, the below descriptions shall be applied under
            this SOC Activity Module to ensure stratum-level quantification and
            appropriate data sources.

    a. Data and Parameters fixed:

12.1.3 |Data and parameters collected for baseline calculation, when project areas
            (farms/land parcels) are being added, and at renewable of crediting period if
            required:

     Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                           18
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

Data/parameter:       CYBL,y
Unit
Description           kg ha-1
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Average annual crop yield per hectare (ha) in stratum y in the
Measurement           project area during the baseline period (five-year average*)
procedures
                      Farm records, e.g. field records, sales receipts
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures       -
Additional comments
                      Yield is recorded for each crop season and accumulated annually
                      (as sum of each crop type). For the baseline, an average annual
                      yield is calculated across the five-year baseline period.*

                      * If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles,
                          crop yield shall be calculated as the average across an equal
                          length period. In the project scenario, the five-year average
                          shall be calculated as a running average from year t-4 to year
                          t (for longer baseline periods, averaging period shall be
                          increased accordingly).

                      Project start

                       -

                      Used in Equation 8. This parameter replaces parameter CYBL in
                      the SOC Framework Methodology (Equation 19).

Data/parameter:       EFFE,y
Unit                  tCO2e kgN-1
Description           Conversion factor for emissions from N fertilizer in stratum y
Source of data        IPCC 2019
Value(s) applied      IPCC 2019 aggregated default value for EFFE is 0.01.
                      Disaggregated default values in IPCC 2019 Table 11.1 may be
Measurement           used if fertilizer inputs are known per fertilizer type.
procedures
Monitoring frequency  -
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   Project start
                      -
                      Used in Equation 2

Data/parameter:       FEBL,y
Unit                  kgN
Description           Mean annual N fertilizer input in stratum y under the baseline
                      scenario
Source of data        Farm records (field level)
Value(s) applied      Average annual N input in stratum y, calculated across baseline
                      period (five years)
Measurement
procedures            Project start
Monitoring frequency  Used in Equation 2
QA/QC procedures

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                         19
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

b. Data and Parameters monitored

Data/parameter:       y,t
                      ha
Unit                  Eligible project area in stratum y at time t (five-year average*)
Description           Farm records (GPS data, GIS files)
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Documentation allowing unambiguous identification and
Measurement           documenting area size at field level
procedures

Monitoring frequency  * If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles,
QA/QC procedures      area shall be calculated as the average across a period of equal
Additional comments   length.
                      Annually (for calculation of five-year average*)

                      Used in Equation 8

Data/parameter:       AQi,y,ET,a
Unit                  km
Description           Quantity of agrochemicals in stratum y for emitter type (ET)
                      applied in year a
Source of data        Farm records
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Documentation of quantity and type of non­N fertilizer
procedures            agrochemicals used for zero tillage (e.g. for crop termination,
                      weed control)
Monitoring frequency  Annually
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   Used in Equation 7

Data/parameter:       AEFi,y,ET
Unit                  tCO2e kg-1
Description           Emissions factor of the agrochemical used in stratum y (for
                      emitter type [ET])
Source of data        Supplier information
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Supplier's life cycle assessment (LCA) information for production
procedures            and transport. If no supplier information is available, national or
                      international default values may be applied.
Monitoring frequency  Annually
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   Used in Equation 7

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                         20
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

Data/parameter:       CYt,y
Unit                  kg ha-1
Description           Average annual crop yield per ha in stratum y in the project area
                      (five-year average*)
Source of data        Farm records, e.g. field records, sales receipts
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Yield is recorded for each crop season and cumulated annually
procedures            (as sum of each crop type). Average annual yield is calculated for
                      each stratum across the five-year reporting period.*

Monitoring frequency  * If the baseline period is extended to cover full rotation cycles,
QA/QC procedures      crop yield shall be calculated as the average across a period of
Additional comments   equal length.
                      Annually (for calculation of five-year average*)

                      Used in Equation 8. This parameter replaces parameter CYt in the
                      SOC Framework Methodology (Equation 19).

Data/parameter:       CYmin,y
Unit                  Kilogram (kg) ha-1
Description           Minimum annual crop yield per ha in stratum y since project start
Source of data        Farm records, e.g. field records, sales receipts
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Yield is recorded for each crop season and cumulated annually
procedures            (as sum of each crop type). CYmin,y represents lowest average
                      annual yield per stratum (CYt,y) since project start and serves as
                      threshold to assess yield reduction.

Monitoring frequency  Note: As the running average yield (CYt,y) also includes baseline
QA/QC procedures      years, CYmin,y for project year one is equal to CYBL.
Additional comments   At verification

                      Used in Equation 8. This parameter replaces parameter CYmin in
                      the SOC Framework Methodology (Equation 19).

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                         21
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

Data/parameter:       BCLA
Unit                  tCO2e ha-1
Description           Emissions from change in biomass carbon stocks in leakage area
Source of data        Remote sensing analysis or public data on leakage area
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Emissions from change in biomass are calculated as the expected
procedures            difference between pre-leakage carbon stocks and post-leakage
                      carbon stocks (e.g. deforestation or removal of woody biomass
                      due to intensification) in the leakage area. Loss of carbon shall be
                      accounted for as tons of CO2 equivalent released.

Monitoring frequency  In line with the requirement in the SOC Framework Methodology
QA/QC procedures      that no positive leakage must be accounted, no increase in
Additional comments   biomass in the leakage area shall be accounted for.
                      At verification

                      Used in Equation 8

Data/parameter:       SOCLA,t-0
Unit                  tCO2e ha-1
Description           Emissions from change in SOC stocks in leakage area
Source of data        Remote sensing analysis or public data on leakage area
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Emissions from change in SOC stocks are calculated as the
procedures            expected difference between pre-leakage SOC stocks and post-
                      leakage SOC stocks (e.g. loss in SOC due to tillage or other
                      agricultural practices) in the leakage area. Loss of SOC shall be
                      accounted for as tons of CO2 equivalent released.

Monitoring frequency  In line with the requirement in the SOC Framework Methodology
QA/QC procedures      that no positive leakage must be accounted, no increase in SOC
Additional comments   in the leakage area shall be accounted for.
                      At verification

                      Used in Equation 8

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                          22
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

Data/parameter:       EEFi,y,SE
Unit                  tCO2e kWh-1
Description           Emissions factor for the electricity used in stratum y in electricity
Source of data        source type
                      a) If the electricity supply source is a regional/national electric
Value(s) applied
Measurement               grid, apply the provisions of the latest version of TOOL05.
procedures            b) If the electricity supply source is a mini grid, apply the
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures          provisions of the latest version of "AMS-I.F.: Renewable
Additional comments       electricity generation for captive use and mini-grid".
                      c) If the electricity supply source is a renewable energy captive
                           power plant, a value of 0 tCO2/MWh shall be applied.
                      d) For fossil-based captive sources, use national GHG inventory
                           sources such as:
                           · USA: Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories

                                (epa.gov)
                           · EU: EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook

                                2019 -- European Environment Agency (europa.eu) and
                                EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook
                                2023 (europa.eu)
                           · If no national data is available, default emission factors in
                                IPCC 2006 Volume 2, Chapter 3, Table 3.3.1 may be
                                applied (taking into account listed uncertainties).

                      Project start, annual review for national updates

                      Used in Equation 5

Data/parameter:       EUWi,y,SE,a
Unit                  kWh
Description           Electricity consumption in stratum y from source SE in year a
Source of data        Farm records
Value(s) applied
Measurement           1) Document electric equipment and power source used for zero
procedures                  tillage practices in each stratum.

Monitoring frequency  2) Quantify electricity used for zero tillage activity based on:
QA/QC procedures             a. direct records (electricity documentation), or
Additional comments          b. duration of equipment use (hours) and power
                                  consumption per equipment type (kWatt).

                      Annually: use-based documentation, aggregated (sum) per year

                      Used in Equation 5

Data/parameter:       FEPR,y,a
Unit                  kgN
Description           N fertilizer input in stratum y under the project scenario in year a
Source of data        Farm records (field level)

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                           23
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

Value(s) applied      Sum of N inputs in stratum y in year a
Measurement           Use-based, aggregated annually
procedures            Used in Equation 2
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FEFi,y,MT
Unit                  tCO2e liter-1
Description           Emissions factor for the fuel used in stratum y in machinery type
Source of data        (MT)
                      a) National GHG inventory sources such as:
Value(s) applied
Measurement                · USA: Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
procedures                      (epa.gov)
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures          · Canada: Emission_Factors.pdf (ec.gc.ca)
Additional comments        · EU: EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook

                                2019 -- European Environment Agency (europa.eu) and
                                EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook
                                2023 (europa.eu)

                      b) If no national data is available, default emission factors in
                           IPCC 2006 Volume 2, Chapter 3, Table 3.3.1 may be applied
                           (taking into account listed uncertainties).

                      Project start, annual review for national updates

                      Used in Equation 4

Data/parameter:       FULi,y,MT,a
Unit                  Liter
Description           Fuel consumption in stratum y by the machinery type (MT) used
                      in year a
Source of data        Farm records
Value(s) applied
Measurement                1) Document machines and fuel type for equipment used for
procedures                      zero tillage practices in each stratum.

Monitoring frequency       2) Document amount of equipment use for zero tillage from:
                                      a. direct records (fuel use), or
QA/QC procedures                      b. equipment usage (hours or distance) and fuel
Additional comments                        consumption (litres/hour or litres/km).

                      Baseline: project start
                      Project: use-based documentation, aggregated (sum) per year

                      Used in Equation 4

                      Climate Security and Sustainable Development                       24
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

      REFERENCES

13.1.1 |In addition to the methodologies, methodological tools, guidelines, and key
            sources listed in the SOC Framework Methodology, this SOC Activity Module
            refers to the following key publications:
              · Cooper, H. V., Sjögersten, S., Lark, R. M., Mooney, S.J. (2021). To till or
                   not to till in a temperate ecosystem? Implications for climate change
                   mitigation. Environmental Research Letters, 16, 054022.
              · Derpsch, R., Friedrich, T., Kassam, A. & Hongwen, L. (2010). Current
                   status of adoption of no-till farming in the world and some of its main
                   benefits. International Journal of Agriculture and Biological Engineering,
                   3, 1­25.
              · FAO (2015). World reference base for soil resources 2014 (Update 2015).
                   http://www.fao.org/3/i3794en/I3794en.pdf
              · Fernández, R., Quiroga, A., Zorati, C. & Noellemeyer, E. (2010). Carbon
                   contents and respiration rates of aggregate size fractions under no-till
                   and conventional tillage. Soil Tillage Research, 109, 103­109.
              · Huang, Y., Ren, W., Wang, L., Hui, D., Grove, J. H., Yang, X., Tao, B.,
                   Goff, B. (2018). Greenhouse gas emissions and crop yield in no-tillage
                   systems: a meta-analysis. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 268;
                   144­53.
              · IPCC (2019). 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
                   Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Volume 4, Agriculture, Forestry and Other
                   Land Use. https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/vol4.html
              · Nearing, M. A., Xie, Y. & Ye, Y. (2017). Natural and anthropogenic rates
                   of soil erosion. International Journal of Soil and Water Conservation
                   Research, 5, 77­84.
              · Ogle, S. M., Breidt, F. J. & Paustian, K. (2005). Agricultural management
                   impacts on soil organic carbon storage under moist and dry climatic
                   conditions of temperate and tropical regions. Biogeochemistry, 72, 87­
                   121.
              · Ogle, S. M., Alsaker, C., Baldock, J., Bernoux, M., Breidt, F. J.,
                   McConkey, B., Regina, K., Vazquez-Amabile, G. G. (2019). Climate and
                   soil characteristics determine where no-till management can store carbon
                   in soils and mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Scientific Reports, 9,
                   11665.
              · Palm, S., Blanco-Canqui, H., DeClerck, F., Gatere, L. & Grace, P. (2014).
                   Conservation agriculture and ecosystem services: an overview.
                   Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Environment, 187, 87­105.
              · Pelosi, C., Bertrand, M. & Roger-Estrade, J. (2009). Earthworm
                   community in conventional, organic and direct seeding with living mulch
                   cropping systems. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 29, 287­295.
                   https://doi.org/10.1051/agro/2008069

Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                                   25
METHODOLOGY - SOC Activity Module for Zero Tillage v 1.0

              · Pittelkow, C. M., Linquist, B. A., Lundy, M. E., Liang, X., van Groenigen,
                   K. J., Lee, J., van Gestel, N., Six, J., Venterea, R. T. & van Kessel, C.
                   (2015a). Productivity limits and potentials of the principles of
                   conservation agriculture. Nature, 517, 365­368.

              · Pittelkow, C. M., Linquist, B. A., Lundy, M. E., Liang, X., van Groenigen,
                   K. J., Lee, J., van Gestel, N., Six, J., Venterea, R. T. & van Kessel, C.
                   (2015b). When does no-till yield more? A global meta-analysis. Field
                   Crops Research, 183, 156­168.

              · Shakoor, A., Shahbaz, M., Farooq, T. H., Sahar, N. E., Shahzad, S. M.,
                   Altaf, M. M., Ashraf, M. (2021). A global meta-analysis of greenhouse
                   gases emission and crop yield under no-tillage as compared to
                   conventional tillage. Science of the Total Environment, 750, 142299.

              · Stroud, J. L. (2020). Earthworms in No-Till: The Key to Soil Biological
                   Farming. In: Dang, Y., Dalal, R., Menzies, N. (eds). No-till Farming
                   Systems for Sustainable Agriculture, 267­280.
                   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-46409-7_16

              · Triplett, G. B. Jr., Dick, W. A. (2008). No-tillage crop production: a
                   revolution in agriculture. Agronomy Journal, 100, S-153­165.

DOCUMENT HISTORY

 Version  Release date  Description
1.0       20/02/2024    First release

          Climate Security and Sustainable Development                                        26
