Procedure for Applying the
AFOLU Non-Permanence
Risk Tool

Version 5.0

                                                                       16 December 2025
All intellectual property rights in this document and any related materials for its interpretation and application constitute
"Website Materials" as defined in the Verra Website Terms and Conditions of Use. All applicable terms and conditions
set out therein apply to this document.

Website Materials are owned by Verra or by third parties who have licensed their materials to Verra and are protected by
applicable intellectual property laws.

Use of this Website Material in the establishment or operation of a project or development of a methodology under a
Verra certification program is permitted ("Authorized Use"). Any other use, including copying, modifying, distributing, or
creating derivative works, whether in whole or in part, is prohibited unless expressly authorized by Verra or the relevant
rights holder.

All proprietary notices must be retained in any copies made under the Authorized Use. Verra trademarks, logos, and
brand names may not be used without Verra's prior written consent.

All rights not expressly granted herein are reserved.
CONTENTS

1 INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE .............................................................................. 1

    1.1 Scope...................................................................................................................................2

2 RISK ANALYSIS AND BUFFER DETERMINATION ................................................... 3

    2.1 Step 1: Risk Analysis ............................................................................................................ 3
    2.2 Internal Risks ........................................................................................................................ 4
    2.3 External Risks......................................................................................................................12
    2.4 Natural Risks ...................................................................................................................... 17
    2.5 Step 2: Overall Non-Permanence Risk Rating and Buffer Determination.................25

DOCUMENT HISTORY ................................................................................................... 27
                                                                                                1 Introduction and Scope

1 INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE

This document provides the procedure for analyzing non-permanence risk and determining buffer
contributions for agriculture, forestry, and other land use (AFOLU) projects using the digital AFOLU Non-
Permanence Risk Tool (NPRT) available in the Verra Project Hub. The document sets out the
requirements for project proponents, implementing partners, and validation/verification bodies to
assess risk and determine the appropriate risk rating. This procedural document should be used to
understand the underlying requirements which are embedded in the tool itself.
The first version of the AFOLU NPRT was developed from 2007­2008 by the VCS AFOLU Advisory Group
­ a working group of leading experts in each AFOLU project category ­ and involved an extensive peer
review process. In 2010, the tool underwent public stakeholder consultation and was revised as part of
VCS Program Version 3. More than 25 independent reviewers, including preeminent risk experts,
investors, NGO representatives, and project developers, supported these efforts and provided detailed
feedback. The VCS AFOLU Steering Committee also provided oversight.
In 2023, Verra revised the tool to include projected future climate change impacts, sea-level rise (SLR),
and agricultural land management-specific risks, among other changes. Future climate and SLR
impacts are predicted based on information provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) in the contribution of Working Group I (the physical science basis) of the Sixth
Assessment Report (AR6) and the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate
(SROCC, 2019). Input was sought through Verra's Nature-Based Solutions working groups and two
public stakeholder consultations. Along with these revisions, Verra introduced a digital version of the
AFOLU NPRT in the Verra Project Hub. Project proponents must use the digital tool to prepare their non-
permanence risk report.
This document is updated periodically, and readers should ensure that they are using the current
version.

                                                                                                                                    1
           1 Introduction and Scope

1.1 Scope

1.1.1  This document sets out the procedure for completing a non-permanence risk analysis to
       determine the non-permanence risk rating ("risk rating"), which shall be used to determine the
       number of buffer credits that an AFOLU project shall deposit into the AFOLU pooled buffer
       account (the procedure for depositing buffer credits is set out in the Registration and Issuance
       Process). Risk ratings are based on an assessment of risk factors that are added together to
       determine the total risk rating, as set out in Section 2. This document and the AFOLU pooled
       buffer account are subject to periodic reconciliation and revision based on a review of existing
       AFOLU verification reports and an assessment of project performance, as set out in the VCS
       Program Guide.

1.1.2 In addition to the requirements set out in this document, AFOLU projects shall conform to all
          applicable VCS Program rules.

1.1.3 Project proponents shall clearly document and substantiate the risk score selected for the
          project. Supporting records shall include all relevant assumptions, parameters, and data
          sources so that the reader can reproduce the results.

1.1.4 The validation/verification body shall evaluate the risk assessment undertaken by the project
          proponent and assess all data, rationales, assumptions, justifications, and documentation
          provided by the project proponent to support the non-permanence risk rating.

1.1.5  Non-permanence risk analysis shall only be applied to removals or avoided emissions through
       carbon sinks. Project activities generating emissions reductions of N2O, CH4, or fossil-derived
       CO2 are not subject to buffer withholding since these GHG benefits cannot be reversed.

                                                                                                        2
                                                        2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

2 RISK ANALYSIS AND BUFFER
  DETERMINATION

2.1 Step 1: Risk Analysis

2.1.1  Potential transient and permanent losses in carbon stocks shall be assessed over a period of
       100 years based on present conditions and the information available at the time of the risk
       analysis, unless otherwise specified in Sections 2.2 to 2.4. Projects with a project start date in
       the past, or projects analyzing risk at a subsequent verification event shall assess the potential
       transient and permanent losses for the next 100 years.

2.1.2 The risk analysis shall be conducted as follows:

       1) Risk factors are classified into three categories: internal risks, external risks, and natural
            risks, and further into sub-categories such as project management, financial viability, and
            stakeholder engagement. The project shall be evaluated against each of the risk factors in
            each category and sub-category as set out in Sections 2.2 (internal risks), 2.3 (external
            risks), and 2.4 (natural risks). A risk score shall be assigned for each risk category and
            sub-category and shall follow the calculation formulas in each table to determine the risk
            rating for the category and sub-category.

       2) The digital AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool, available in the Verra Project Hub
            (https://projecthub.verra.org/), shall be used to assess risk and complete the Non-
            Permanence Risk Report. This document is intended to assist project proponents in
            understanding and applying the digital AFOLU NPRT.

       3) Where applicable, and where the project proponent demonstrates that related mitigation
            activities will be (at validation) or are being (at verification) applied, the risk rating for the
            sub-category will be reduced, as determined in Sections 2.2­2.4.

       4) As set out in Sections 2.2­2.4, all sub-categories set a minimum rating of zero, even when
            the calculation would otherwise result in a rating lower than zero.

       5) The total risk rating for each category (internal, external, and natural) shall be determined
            by summing the ratings for each sub-category in the category. The total rating for any
            category shall not be less than zero.

       6) Projects assessed as Risk Failed for any risk factor shall fail the entire risk analysis. Where
            the overall risk rating or the summed risk rating for each category is unacceptably high, as
            set out in Section 2.5.3, the project shall fail the risk analysis. Projects that fail the risk
            assessment shall not be eligible for crediting until the project has adequately addressed
            the risk to the extent that it would no longer be assessed as Fail.

                                                                                                          3
       2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

       7) An overall risk rating percentage shall be determined based on the ratings from each risk
            category as set out in Section 2.5.

2.1.3  Where risks are relevant to only a portion of the project area in a grouped project, the project
       area shall be divided into sub-areas with similar risk profiles for the non-permanence risk
       assessment (Further requirements on non-permanence risk analysis for grouped projects are
       set out in the VCS Standard).

2.1.4 Where a risk or mitigation factor does not apply to the project, the score shall be zero for that
          factor.

2.2 Internal Risks

2.2.1 Project management (PM) shall be assessed using Table 1, noting the following:

          1) Each project management risk factor set out in Table 1 shall be assessed.

          2) Management teams are the individuals responsible for day-to-day management and
               implementation of project activities. Management teams may include the project
               proponent, the implementing partner (see the VCS Program Definitions for the definition of
               implementing partner), or carbon project development partners who have contractual
               commitments to support the project activities.

          3) Evidence that species planted are adapted to the same or similar agro-ecological zone(s) in
               which the project is located and that ALM practices are appropriate to the agro-ecological
               zone(s), soil types, and cropping/grassland systems may be demonstrated through
               publications in scientific journals; technical reports from government agencies, NGOs or
               research groups; or successful use over time by other projects registered with the VCS
               Program.

          4) Ongoing enforcement refers to protecting carbon stocks in the project area from
               encroachment by outside actors; for example, where a REDD project faces risk from
               external actors entering the project area for illegal logging.

          5) Projects shall have an adaptive management plan. Adaptive management plans identify,
               assess, and create a mitigation plan for potential risks to the project, including those
               identified in this document, and any other obstacles to project implementation. They
               include a process for monitoring progress, documenting lessons learned or corrections that
               may be needed, and incorporating them into project decision-making in future monitoring
               periods. The onus is on the project proponent to demonstrate that such plans are in place
               and have considered potential risks and obstacles to the project. Further, a system is in
               place for adapting to changing circumstances.

                                                                                                         4
                                                      2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Table 1. Project management                                                                          Score
 Project Management

         Does the project have an adaptive management plan in place that includes a monitoring plan? If No,
Q1 the project fails the risk assessment. If Yes, proceed to Q2.

Q2 Do any of the following project management risks apply to the project?

         Species planted (where applicable) associated with more than 25% of the stocks on which
a) GHG credits have previously been issued are not native nor proven to be adapted to the same 2

         or similar agro-ecological zone(s) as the project area.

b)  Ongoing enforcement to prevent encroachment by outside actors is required to protect more        2

    than 50% of stocks on which GHG credits have previously been issued.

    Management team does not include individuals with significant experience in all skills

c) necessary to successfully undertake the project activities (i.e., any area of required            2

    experience is not covered by an individual with at least five years' experience in that area).

d)  Management team does not maintain a presence in the country or is located more than one          2

    day of travel from the project site, considering all parcels or polygons in the project area.

e)  Management team has previously failed to submit a loss report within two years of detecting a    2

    loss event.

    ALM projects: Some or all the farmers participating in the project have not received training

f) on the improved ALM practices implemented as part of the project or the monitoring and            2

    reporting procedures implemented during the crediting period.

g)  ALM projects: Some or all the farmers participating in the project are unaware of the potential  2
    for yields to decrease temporarily due to the transition to improved agricultural practices.

Q3 Do any of the following mitigations apply to the project?

    Mitigation: Management team includes individuals with significant (i.e., more than five years)

         experience in AFOLU project design and implementation, carbon accounting, and reporting     -2
h)
    (e.g., individuals who have successfully managed projects through validation, verification, and

    issuance of GHG credits) with the VCS Program or other GHG programs.

    Mitigation (ALM projects): A comprehensive training plan for all farmers participating in the

i)  project is in place, covering implementation of planned ALM practices, monitoring and            -2

    reporting obligations and their potential costs.

    Total Project Management (PM) = [as applicable, (a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h + i)]
    Total shall not be less than zero.

                                                                                                             5
                                         2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

2.2.2 Financial viability (FV) shall be assessed using Table 2, noting the following:

          1) The financial viability of a project is based on 1) the number of years until breakeven is
               reached (i.e., the payback period) and 2) the funding secured relative to what is needed to
               implement and operate the project until reaching breakeven.

          2) Breakeven is the point at which total cost equals total revenue. The length of time it takes
               to breakeven is the payback period. The payback period shall be calculated following
               generally accepted accounting principles (i.e., Payback period = initial investment/net cash
               flow per year). In the calculation of cash flow per year, cash in may include commercial
               revenue streams associated with the project, secured revenue, and conservatively
               projected revenues from the sale of GHG credits and other funding sources, such as donor
               funds, and carbon prepayments. Cash out shall include, at a minimum, project
               implementation costs, costs associated with GHG credit generation (e.g., validation,
               verification, and registration), and, where applicable, interest expenses, repayment of
               loans, and any required equity distributions.

          3) The percentage of needed funding secured shall be calculated by summing all funding and
               revenue secured and dividing this by the total cash out up to and including the year the
               project reaches breakeven.

          4) Projects may demonstrate that funding has been secured through, for example, financial
               statements, bank records, executed commodity purchase agreements, executed emission
               reduction purchase agreements, or other signed contractual agreements. Evidence shall be
               provided showing agreement counterparties are in good financial standing and can meet
               their financial obligations. Given execution uncertainties, options contracts shall not be
               counted as secured funding. The assumptions made for revenue from both carbon and
               other commercial sources (e.g., timber, agricultural commodities) must be conservative.
               The source, pricing assumptions, frequency of verification, and other relevant variables
               shall be clearly documented.

          5) Callable financial resources are those not included in secured funding but readily available
               to the project. The availability of such resources may be indicated through letters of credit,
               revolving credit lines or other financial backing. Signed agreements shall be provided as
               evidence to demonstrate the project's ability to access funding as needed.

Table 2. Financial viability

Financial Viability                                                                    Score

Q1  How long is the project's payback period (i.e., how many years will it take to breakeven)?

a)  The payback period is greater than 20 years from the current risk assessment. Risk failed

b)  The payback period is greater than 10 years from the current risk assessment, 3
    but less than or equal to 20 years.

                                                                                                6
                                       2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Financial Viability                                                                         Score

              The payback period is greater than seven and up to and including 10 years     2
c)

              from the current risk assessment.

d)  The payback period is greater than four and up to and including seven years             1

    from the current risk assessment.

e)  The payback period is four years or less from the current risk assessment.              0

              What percentage of funding has the project secured to cover the total cash out required before the
Q2

              project reaches breakeven?

f)  Project has secured less than 15% of the funding needed to cover the total              3

    cash out required before the project reaches breakeven.

g)  Project has secured from 15% to less than 40% of the funding needed to cover            2

    the total cash out required before the project reaches breakeven.

h)  Project has secured from 40% to less than 80% of the funding needed to cover            1

    the total cash out required before the project reaches breakeven.

i)  Project has secured 80% or more of the funding needed to cover the total cash           0
    out before the project reaches breakeven.

Q3  Does the following mitigation apply to the project?

j)  Mitigation: Project has available, as callable and secured financial resources,         -2
    at least 80% of total cash out before the project reaches breakeven.

Total Financial Viability (FV) = [as applicable, ((b, c, d, or e) + (f, g, h or i )+ j)]

Total shall not be less than zero and the sub-total for question two with the mitigation j
shall not be less than zero (note: the mitigation only applies to Q2)

2.2.3 Opportunity cost (OC) shall be assessed using Table 3, noting the following:

          1) Opportunity cost analysis shall be based on the net present value (NPV) of the alternative
               land uses identified in the project's additionality assessment except where most baseline
               activities are subsistence driven (see 3 below). The onus is on the project proponent to
               demonstrate and substantiate what constitutes credible alternative land use scenarios.
               The alternative land use scenarios shall be the activities identified in the baseline scenario.

          2) The NPV analysis shall cover the project crediting period, compare credible alternatives to
               the project and use a conservative estimate of revenue from GHG credit sales and other

                                                                                                                  7
                                                             2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

    project revenue streams. Estimates of GHG credit prices shall be based on market
    intelligence reports or other published sources.

    3) The NPV analysis shall also compare potential price fluctuations of commodities impacted
         by the project. The financial discount rates used shall be based on published sources and
         represent the appropriate risk for the relevant land use scenario. Where the project
         proponent is not the landowner or tenant, the NPV to the landowner or tenant shall be
         compared.

    4) Where most baseline activities are subsistence-driven, an NPV analysis is not required.
         Instead, a quantitative assessment of the net impacts of the project on the social and
         economic well-being of the communities that derive livelihoods from the project area (see
         Section 2.3.2) shall be undertaken within five years of the date of the previous risk
         assessment. The analysis shall be based on social assessments such as household surveys
         and participatory rural appraisals that follow best practices. Baseline scenario assumptions
         of household revenue shall be based on third-party data (e.g., household surveys or
         national statistics). The impact of carbon revenues on communities shall only be
         considered where the communities have designed and agreed on a benefit-sharing plan.

Table 3. Opportunity cost

Opportunity Cost                                                                                    Score

Q1 Are the baseline activities subsistence-driven? If No, proceed to Q2. If Yes, proceed to Q3.

Q2  What is the NPV of the most profitable alternative land use activity compared to the NPV of the project
    activity? A response is only required if the answer to Q1 is No

a)  Net present value (NPV) of the most profitable alternative land use activity is expected to be  8

    at least 100% more than that of the project activities.

b)  NPV of the most profitable alternative land use activity is expected to be greater than 50%     6

    and up to 100% more than that of project activities.

c)  NPV of the most profitable alternative land use activity is expected to be greater than 20%     4

    and up to and including 50% more than that of project activities.

d)  NPV of the most profitable alternative land use activity is expected to be 20% or less than     0

    that of project activities.

e)  NPV of project activities is expected to be greater than 20% and up to 50% more profitable      -2

    than that of the most profitable alternative land use activity.

f)  NPV of project activities is expected to be over 50% more profitable than that of the most      -4

    profitable alternative land use activity.

                                                                                                             8
                                     2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Opportunity Cost                                                                               Score

           Does the project have net positive community impacts? A response is only required if the answer to Q1
Q3

           is Yes

g)  Net positive community impacts of project activities are not demonstrated.                 8

h)  Net positive community impacts of project activities are demonstrated.                     0

Q4 Do any of the following mitigations apply to the project?

    Mitigation: Project is protected by a legally binding agreement (see Section 2.2.4) to

i)  continue management practices that protect the credited carbon stocks over the duration of -2

    the project crediting period.

j)  Mitigation: Project is protected by legally binding agreement (see Section 2.2.4) to continue -4
    management practices that protect the credited carbon stocks for at least 100 years.

    Mitigation: Where there is potential for revenue loss compared to the most profitable

k)  alternative land use activity, project is a non-profit1 or has additional financial support (e.g., -2
    via grants, government funding, ecosystem services payments or SD VISta assets) to

    overcome expected revenue loss.

    Total Opportunity Cost (OC) = [as applicable, (a, b, c, d, e, f, g, or h) + (i or j) + k]
    Total shall not be less than zero.

2.2.4 Project longevity (PL) shall be assessed using Table 4, noting the following:

          1) The project longevity score shall be determined by the formulas set out in Table 4.

          2) Evidence shall be provided demonstrating that the right to operate (see the VCS Standard
               for right to operate requirements) can be maintained for the entire project longevity (e.g.,
               where the right to operate is secured through a concession that is shorter than the project
               longevity, the concession is renewable for the entire longevity period being claimed).

          3) For all AFOLU project types, the entire project longevity shall be covered by management,
               financial, and monitoring plans submitted to local government, financial institutions, or
               made public. The intention to continue management practices shall be stated and planned
               for in these documents. They may include external evidence such as municipal land-use

1 A non-profit is an organization that does not distribute any surplus funds to owners or shareholders, but instead uses
them to pursue its goals, such as poverty alleviation, community development, or biodiversity conservation. Although
governments and government agencies may meet this definition, they are not considered non-profit organizations in this
tool.

                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                 2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

     plans, institutional structures, ecological-economic zoning, etc. For ARR and IFM projects
     with harvesting, the project longevity is the number of years that project activities that
     maintain carbon stocks will be maintained, either through the continuation of the project
     activity or replanting or re-growth of trees after the last harvest or cutting cycle in the
     project crediting period. Projects shall demonstrate their commitment to continue the
     management practice or to replant or allow re-growth through evidence. Evidence may
     include certification of sustainable forest management by the Forest Stewardship Council
     (FSC), Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC), or other
     internationally recognized schemes, a detailed management plan outlining practices that
     will be implemented to maintain or increase carbon stocks over the long term, or
     contractual agreements for timber supply beyond the last harvest in the project crediting
     period. Re-growth may be considered only where project areas, after harvesting, will be
     managed for regeneration (naturally or with assistance), maintaining the current species
     mix and allowing trees to re-grow at least to the age at which trees were harvested, as
     demonstrated in management plans.

4) Legal agreement or requirement to continue the management practice refers to any legally
     enforceable agreement or requirement, such as a conservation easement or protected area
     law requiring the continuation of the management practice that sequesters carbon or
     avoids emissions for the project's longevity. In ARR and IFM projects with harvesting, where
     allowing re-growth of harvested areas is required by law, this may be demonstrated by
     citing the appropriate legal statute and common practice.

5) Project longevity may be assessed at the project level (i.e., across aggregated project
     activity instances) in grouped projects.

6) Grouped projects where contract durations with individual project activity instances are
     less than the project longevity shall apply the Without legal agreement or requirement to
     continue the management practice formula in Table 4. Further, a plan for ensuring that the
     GHG benefit of the project is maintained over the full project longevity at the group level
     shall be established and, at a minimum, include the following:

     a) A description of how the project proponent will incentivize project activity instances to
          continue their participation in the project (e.g., contract renewal terms, providing
          ongoing training and support, vesting schedules);

     b) A plan for how project activity instances that do not renew their contracts will be
          monitored for permanence for at least the project longevity as set out in the VCS
          Standard. Where such monitoring is not possible, projects shall assume a complete
          loss of carbon stocks when a project activity instance leaves the project and follow the
          loss event reporting requirements set out in the Registration and Issuance Process;

     c) A description of how the project proponent intends to expand the project over time to
          include additional project activity instances to help compensate for any losses; and

                                                                                                                        10
                                                                2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

    d) A commitment from the project proponent to maintain the project for at least the
         project longevity.

Table 4. Project longevity

Project Longevity                                                      Score

Q1 Did the project request registration on or after 1 January 2024?

Q2  Does the project have a legally binding agreement that covers at least a 100-year period from the

    project's start date? If Yes, the project is given a zero score for this risk category. If No, proceed to Q2.

           What is the project longevity in years? If you answered Yes to
           Q1 and the project longevity is less than 40 years, the project
           fails the risk assessment. If you answered No to Q1 and the
Q3 project longevity is less than 30 years, the project fails the risk Number of years
           assessment. Please note that projects with project longevity of
           less than 40 years will be ineligible for the Core Carbon
           Principles label.

Q4  Does the project have a management, financial and monitoring plan for the entire project longevity? If

    No, the project fails the risk assessment. If Yes, proceed to Q5.

Q5 Is the project an ARR or IFM project with harvesting? If No, proceed to Q7. If Yes, proceed to Q6.

Q6  Can the project demonstrate a commitment to continue the management practice, replant, or allow re-

    growth? If No, the project fails the risk assessment. If Yes, proceed to Q7.

Q7  Does the project have legal agreement or requirement to continue the management practice(s)? If No,

    proceed to a. If Yes, proceed to b.

           Without legal agreement or requirement to continue the      = 25 - (project longevity/5)
a)

           management practice.

           With legal agreement or requirement to continue the         = 25 - (project longevity/4)
b)

           management practice.

           Is the project a grouped project where contract durations with individual project activity instances are
Q8

           less than the project longevity?

Total Project Longevity (PL) = [as applicable, (a or b)]
Total shall not be less than zero.

                                                                                                                     11
2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

2.2.5 The total risk rating for internal risk shall be determined using Table 5.  Rating
Table 5. Total internal risk

 Total Internal Risk
 Total Internal Risk = (PM + FV + OC + PL)
 Total shall not be less than zero.

2.3 External Risks

2.3.1 Land and resource tenure (LT) shall be assessed using Table 6, noting the following:

          1) The project proponent shall select the risk score for the land rights, resource access rights,
               use rights, and the right to operate demonstration applicable to the project.

          2) Land and resource tenure is the system of rights to lands, territories, and resources,
               including obligations, rules, institutions, and processes regulating ownership of, access to,
               and use of land and associated resources. Land or resource rights may be synonymous
               with property rights and encompass full ownership and lesser usufructuary rights to use or
               have access to the project area and the resources within it, such as rights to fell timber,
               collect fallen branches, or graze livestock.

          3) Land may be government-, community-, or privately owned. Such land tenure may refer to a
               title or right encompassing full control of the land in perpetuity and may include the right to
               transfer or sell land or resource access and use rights.

          4) A conservation easement or servitude is a permanent, legally binding restriction voluntarily
               placed on an area of land to protect its associated conservation resources or values. It
               transfers with the land when the ownership changes.

          5) A protected area is a clearly defined area recognized, dedicated, and managed through
               legal or other means to achieve the long-term conservation of nature and its associated
               ecosystem services and cultural values. Protected areas include national parks, nature
               reserves, wilderness areas, wildlife management areas and landscape-protected areas,
               which the government, communities, or other entities may manage.

          6) The right to operate shall be demonstrated as set out in the VCS Standard. There may be
               overlapping claims to land or resource rights, such as where customary rights overlap with
               legal ownership. Evidence shall be provided that due process has been undertaken to
               discover any disputes over the right to operate and land or resource rights, including
               determining whether there are overlapping boundaries or competing claims to land or
               resource rights that may put the project carbon stocks at risk of reversal. The onus is upon
               the project proponent to demonstrate such a process has been undertaken, failing which
               the project shall not pass the risk assessment and shall not be eligible for crediting.

                                                                                          12
                                                       2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

    Evidence may include survey responses, correspondence with relevant land title agencies
    or departments, or proof that the project has secured title insurance.

    7) Stakeholder encroachment in the project area impacting project carbon stocks (e.g., tree
         harvesting, land conversion) after the project start date and within five years of the current
         risk report is considered a dispute. Disputes also include water use rights that may affect
         the hydrology or sediment in WRC project areas by causing the project area's water table to
         drop or otherwise impact the hydrology of the project area, resulting in higher GHG
         emissions. The project shall demonstrate endorsement (through a legal agreement) from
         all entities with verified rights claims or land or resource rights (such as customary rights
         holders).

    8) WRC projects are subject to upstream and sea impacts (e.g., changes in water and
         sediment flows, tidal processes, SLR) that may undermine the permanence of carbon
         stocks. Such impacts can be the result of natural processes or policy decisions.
         Hydrologically connected areas adjacent to a WRC project shall not significantly negatively
         impact the project area (see the VCS Standard for requirements on hydrological
         connectivity in WRC projects).

    9) Projects located in a country/jurisdiction with a history of national, sub-national, or local
         government ("Government") intervention in land or resource use have a higher non-
         permanence risk because such intervention demonstrates that the government is willing
         and able to upset expectations regarding land or resource rights. That evidence of past
         practice may reflect political volatility and future potential risk of non-permanence. The risk
         is mitigated entirely if specific instances of expropriation and government intervention in
         land rights in the project area have been conclusively resolved against the government in a
         court of competent jurisdiction.

Table 6. Land tenure (right to operate) and resource access or impacts

Land Tenure (Right to Operate) and Resource Access or Impacts                                 Score

Q1  Has due process been undertaken to discover any disputes over the right to operate and land or

    resource rights? If No, the project fails the risk assessment. If Yes, proceed to Q2.

Q2  Has the project executed a binding legal agreement(s) (such as a contract) securing the legal right to

    control and operate project activities over the entire project area with all entities that have verified

    rights claims or verified land or resource rights (such as customary rights holders)? If No, the project

    fails the risk assessment. If Yes, proceed to Q3.

Q3  Do the same or different entities hold the right to operate and land or resource rights?

a)  The right to operate and land or resource rights are held by the same entity(ies).        0

                                                                                                              13
                                                          2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

    Land Tenure (Right to Operate) and Resource Access or Impacts                                  Score

b)  The right to operate and land or resource rights are held by different entity(ies) (e.g., the  2

    government owns the land, and the project proponent holds a lease or concession).

Q4  Is the project in a country/jurisdiction with a history of national, sub-national, or local government

    ("Government") intervention in land or resource use?

c)  Government has previously expropriated significant areas of land (i.e., 10% or more) in 10

    the project area in the past 20 years.

d)  Government has previously changed land rights in the project's jurisdiction (e.g.,             5

    cancelled, or blocked land titles, expropriated land or issued overlapping land titles) in

    the past 20 years.

e)  No instances of Government intervention in the past 20 years or specific instances of 0

    expropriation and government intervention in land rights in the project area have been

    conclusively resolved against the government in a court of competent jurisdiction.

Q5  What percentage of the project area is affected by disputes over land tenure or the right to operate?

f)  Disputes exist in more than 5% of the project area.                                            10

g)  Disputes exist in up to and including 5% of the project area.                                  5

h)  No disputes exist.                                                                             0

Q6  What percentage of the project area has disputes over access or use rights?

i)  Disputes exist in more than 5% of the project area.                                            10

j)  Disputes exist in up to and including 5% of the project area.                                  5

k)  No disputes exist.                                                                             0

    Have the risks of upstream and sea impacts undermining the carbon stocks of a WRC project been

Q7  demonstrated as insignificant or effectively mitigated for the ten years that follow the risk

    assessment?

l)  Potential upstream and sea impacts are not demonstrated to be insignificant or                 5

    effectively mitigated.

m)  Potential upstream and sea impacts are demonstrated to be insignificant or                     0
    effectively mitigated.

                                                                                                            14
                                 2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Land Tenure (Right to Operate) and Resource Access or Impacts                                Score

Q8  Do any of the following mitigations apply to the project?

    Mitigation: Project area is protected by a legally binding agreement (e.g., a license,

            conservation easement, conservation servitude or protected area) to continue     -2
n)
    management practices that protect carbon stocks for the duration of the project

    crediting period.

    Mitigation: Where disputes over land tenure, the right to operate, or land or resource

o)  rights exist, documented evidence is provided that demonstrates the project is taking    -2

    action to try to resolve the disputes or clarify overlapping claims to land or resource

    rights.

Total Land and Resource Tenure (LT) = [as applicable, ((a or b) + (c, d, or e) + (f , g or
h) + (I, j or k) + (l or m) + n + o)]

Total shall not be less than zero.

2.3.2 Stakeholder engagement (SE) shall be assessed using Table 7, noting the following:

    1) Stakeholder engagement shall be assessed for projects where local populations, including
         those living in the project area or within 20 km of the boundary of the project area, are
         reliant on the project area, such as for essential food, fuel, fodder, medicines or building
         materials. Evidence of stakeholder engagement may include social assessments such as
         household surveys and participatory rural appraisals.

    2) Stakeholders are considered consulted and involved in participatory planning where there
         have been direct meetings and planning with associations or community groups that are
         legally recognized to represent the households.

Table 7. Stakeholder engagement

    Stakeholder Engagement                                                                   Score

        Are local populations, including those living in the project area or within 20 km of the boundary of the
Q1 project area, reliant on the project area? If No, the risk rating for stakeholder engagement is zero. If Yes,

        proceed to Q2.

Q2 Have more or less than 50% of stakeholders living within and reliant on the project area been consulted?

a)  Less than 50% of stakeholders living within the project area and who are reliant on the  10
    project area have been consulted.

b)  More than 50% of stakeholders living within the project area and who are reliant on the  0
    project have been consulted.

                                                                                                    15
                                                   2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

    Stakeholder Engagement                                                                     Score

        Have more or less than 20% of stakeholders living outside the project area within 20 km of the project
Q3

        area, and who are reliant on the project area been consulted?

c)  Less than 20% of stakeholders living outside the project area within 20 km of the project  5

    area, and who are reliant on the project area have been consulted.

d)  More than 20% of stakeholders living outside the project area within 20 km of the project  0

    area, and who are reliant on the project area have been consulted.

    Total Stakeholder Engagement (SE) = [as applicable, (a or b) + (c or d)]
    Total shall not be less than zero.

2.3.3 Political risk (PC) shall be assessed using Table 8, noting the following:

          1) A governance score (of between -2.5 and 2.5) shall be calculated from the mean of
               governance scores across the six indicators of the World Bank Institute's Worldwide
               Governance Indicators (WGI).2 The mean should be averaged over the most recent five
               years of available data. Governance scores shall be translated into risk scores as set out in
               Table 8.

          2) The mitigation discount may be subtracted if all the following apply to the project:

               a) The project is in a country that is a Party to the Paris Agreement, and the country has
                    submitted a Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC Secretariat in the
                    last five years;

               b) The country's NDC includes AFOLU commitments (conditional or unconditional); and

               c) The country has a documented and active climate change plan that includes the
                    project activity (e.g., a climate-smart agriculture program).

Table 8. Political risk                                                                           Score
 Political Risk

Q1 What is the governance score for the country?

a)  Governance score of less than -0.79.                                                          6

b)  Governance score of -0.79 to less than -0.32.                                                 4

2 The World Bank Institute Worldwide Governance Indicators are available at:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/worldwide-governance-indicators

                                                                                                                                  16
                                                             2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Political Risk                                                                                  Score

c)  Governance score of -0.32 to less than 0.19.                                                2

d) Governance score of 0.19 to less than 0.82.                                                  1

e) Governance score of 0.82 or more.                                                            0

Q2 Does the following mitigation apply to the project?

    Mitigation: The project is in a country that: 1) is party to the Paris Agreement and has

          submitted an NDC to the UNFCCC Secretariat in the last five years; 2) includes AFOLU  -2
f)
    commitments (conditional or unconditional) in its NDC, and 3) has a documented and active

    climate change plan that includes the project activity.

    Total Political Risk (PC) [as applicable, ((a, b, c, d or e) + f)]
    Total shall not be less than zero.

2.3.4 The total risk rating for external risk shall be determined using Table 9.                Rating
Table 9. External risk

 External Risk
   Total External Risk = (LT + SE + PC)
   Total shall not be less than zero.

2.4 Natural Risks

2.4.1 Natural risk is comprised of historic natural risk, projected future climate change impact, and
          sea-level rise impact.

2.4.2 Historic natural risks shall be assessed using Table 10 and Table 11, noting the following:

          1) Historic natural risk is based on likelihood (i.e., the historical average number of times the
               event has occurred in the project area over the last 100 years) and significance (i.e., the
               average size of each event). The frequency and significance of events shall be estimated
               based on historical records, probabilities, remote sensing data, peer-reviewed scientific
               literature, survey data or documented local knowledge. Where data are available for at
               least 20 years but less than 100 years, projects shall conservatively extrapolate using the
               data. Where data are unavailable for the project area, likelihood and significance shall be
               determined based on conservative estimates (i.e., not underestimating the possible
               frequency or severity) of historical events in the project region.

                                                                                                        17
                                                           2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

       2) The significance of natural risks shall be determined based on the damage that the project
            would sustain if the event occurred. It shall be estimated by calculating the percentage of
            average carbon stocks in the project area that would be lost in a single event.

       3) The natural risk mitigation factors may be applied where evidence demonstrates that
            prevention measures are in place, or the project has a history of effectively containing
            natural risk. Examples of mitigation or prevention measures include the following:

       a) Fire risk: Fuel removal, the establishment of fire breaks and fire towers, and ready
            access to adequate fire-fighting equipment.

       b) Risk of pest or disease outbreaks: Planting of biodiverse species, selection of pest or
            disease resistant species and co-planting of vegetation that inhibits pest infestation
            during the early growing period.

       c) Extreme weather risk: Planting of frost-tolerant species in areas where winter frost is a
            risk, use of riparian zones or other buffers for flood or storm control and use of species
            tolerant of wet soil conditions where flooding risks exist.

       d) Other natural risks: Use of plant species tolerant of salinity fluctuations in estuarine
            wetlands.

2.4.3 Historic natural risk shall be assessed as follows:

       1) AFOLU projects shall assess, at a minimum, fire, pest and disease outbreaks, extreme
            weather events such as droughts and hurricanes, and geological risks such as earthquakes
            and volcanoes. WRC projects shall also assess changes in the seasonal timing and depth
            of the water table and, where applicable, wrack deposition in tidal wetlands from storm
            surges.

       2) Likelihood and significance (LS) and mitigation (M) (if any) shall be assessed for each risk
            factor identified (see Table 10). The sub-total risk value is calculated by multiplying the LS
            and M for each natural risk applicable to the project.

2.4.4  The projected future climate change impact shall be assessed based on climatic impact drivers
       (CIDs). The CID approach produces an amplifying factor to increase the historic natural risk
       score based on projected future climate change impact (see Table 11). Projected future climate
       change impact shall be assessed, noting the following:

       1) For each CID category, the project change value and direction of change (positive or
            negative) shall be used to specify if it is expected to have a positive or negative impact on
            the project. For example, increasing mean air temperature can be a risk to successfully
            establishing seedlings in a reforestation project (negative impact), but could promote
            better yields for certain crops in an ALM project (positive impact). The impact shall be
            justified as follows:

                                                                                                      18
                                                                           2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

                a) For CID categories that are expected to positively impact the project, reference an
                     external source(s) (e.g., peer-reviewed literature or a report published by a government
                     agency) to justify the positive impact.

                b) For CID categories that are expected to have a negative impact with a CID impact level
                     of one, reference an external source(s) (e.g., peer-reviewed literature or a report
                     published by a government agency) to justify the negative impact.

                c) For CID categories that are expected to have a negative impact with a CID impact level
                     of two or greater, no justification of the impact is required.

                d) For CID categories that do not apply to the project, provide a brief explanation (e.g., a
                     few sentences) to justify why that category is irrelevant to the project activity.

           2) Risk from projected future climate change impacts can be reduced where evidence is
                provided that the project proponent meets a minimum of five adaptive capacity criteria. To
                meet each adaptive capacity criterion the project proponent shall answer all interpretation
                questions and provide supporting evidence. If at least five criteria are met (see Table 12),
                the amplifying factor fraction is reduced by 40%. Evidence supporting the implementation
                of adaptive capacity criteria shall be provided.

           3) The natural risk affected by climate change (NR-c) is calculated by multiplying the historic
                natural risk score by the projected future climate change impact amplifying factor. The
                amplifying factor shall only be applied to natural risks indicated to be affected by climate
                change (e.g., fire, extreme weather).

2.4.5 The SLR risk shall be assessed where the project is in a coastal zone, noting the following:
           1) SLR risk shall be assessed based on the physical and natural conditions of the project
                (i.e., ecosystem degradation, coastal flooding, coastal erosion, and degree of salinization)
                and the overall impact level of coastal flood and erosion.
           2) The SLR risk rating can be reduced where evidence is provided that the project proponent
                has taken specific measures to adapt (See Table 14).
           3) The sub-total SLR risk score is calculated by multiplying the SLR risk score by the
                adaptation score.

2.4.6 The total risk rating for natural risk is determined as the sum of natural risk affected by climate
          change (NR-c), natural risk not affected by climate change (NR-nc) and SLR risk. If the total
          natural risk is above 35, the project fails the risk assessment and ineligible for crediting.

                                                                                                                                  19
                                                                 2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Table 10. Historic natural risk scores

Significance                             Historical Likelihood

                                         More      Once            Once      Once      Once every 100
                                         than      every 10        every 25  every 50  years or less
                                         once      to less         to less   to less   frequently, or risk
                                         every 10  than 25         than 50   than      is not applicable to
                                         years     years           years     100       the project area
                                                                             years

Catastrophic (70% or greater loss of     FAIL                30    20        5         4

carbon stocks)

Devastating (50% to less than 70% loss   30                  20    5         4         3

of carbon stocks)

Major (25% to less than 50% loss of      20                  5     4         3         2
carbon stocks)

Minor (5% to less than 25% loss of       5                   4     3         2         1

carbon stocks)

Insignificant (less than 5% loss of

carbon stocks) or transient (full        4                   3     2         1         1

recovery of lost carbon stocks expected

within 10 years of any event)

Not applicable                           0                   0     0         0         0

Mitigation Score

Prevention measures applicable to the risk factor are implemented                      0.50

Demonstrated history of effectively containing natural risk                            0.50

Both of the above                                                                      0.25

None of the above                                                                      1

                                                                                             20
                                                          2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Table 11. Natural risk assessment

Natural Risk                      Historic    Mitigation  Sub-total Affected by Climate
                                                          Risk (LS×M) Change?
                                  Natural Risk (M)

                                  Score (LS)

a) Fire (F)                                                                                   Yes

b) Pest and disease                                                                           Yes

outbreaks (PD)

c) Extreme weather (W)                                                                        Yes

d) Geological risk (G)*

e) Other natural risk (ON1)

f) Other natural risk (ON2)

g) Other natural risk (ON3)

h) Sea-level rise (SLR)                                                                       Yes

Projected Future Climate Change             Aggregated Sub-total Risk               Future    Total
Impact on Natural Risk                                                              Climate
                                                                                    Change    (Aggregated sub-
                                                                                    Impact    total risk x future
                                                                                    Factor3   climate change
                                                                                              impact factor)

Natural risk associated with climate        Sum of the post-mitigation risk         1 to 1.4
change impact (NR-c)                        rating of each historical natural risk
                                            impacted by climate change

Natural risk NOT associated with            Sum of the post-mitigation risk
climate change impact (NR-nc)
                                            rating of each historical natural risk  1

                                            not impacted by climate change

  Total Natural Risk                                                                          Rating

Total Natural Risk = (NR-c + NR-nc + SLR)

Total shall not be less than zero.

* If the geological risk is landslide, please indicate "yes" it is affected by climate change, otherwise indicate
"no."

3 As calculated using the digital AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool

                                                                                                                                  21
                                2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Table 12. Criteria for evaluating adaptive capacity to future climate change4

Criteria     Adaptive Capacity                                              Supporting Evidence Examples

             Description:

             Availability of a range of policy options to address climate   A document or report of policies
             change that apply directly to the project activity             identified at the national or
                                                                            subnational level or internally to
             Participation of different actors, levels, and sectors in the  address climate change.
             climate change governance process

1) Variety   Interpretation:

             Are there policies to address climate change at the national   A role-activity matrix within an
             and sub-national levels, and has the project proponent         adaptive management plan that
             taken them into account in the project design?                 indicates the staff who will lead the
                                                                            climate change mitigation actions.

             Has the project proponent identified organizational actors
             responsible for such actions?

             Description:

2) Learning  Ability to address future climate events and learn from past   A document, report, or internal
capacity     experiences to improve routines regarding climatic             communication consolidated into
             experiences                                                    an adaptative management plan in
                                                                            which the project explores and
             Evidence of changes in assumptions that support actions        explains how it plans to learn from
             regarding climate change experiences                           and adapt to climate events.

             Interpretation:

             Has the project proponent considered results from the
             calculation models and past experiences of climate events
             in its internal decision-making processes?

3) Room for  Description:                                                   A document, report, or internal
change                                                                      communication showing how
             Continual access to climate information at different spatial-  climate change information (at
             temporal scales (e.g., early warning systems, climate          different spatial-temporal scales
             change projections)                                            from national reports to the
                                                                            UNFCCC, local or regional remote
             Interpretation:                                                sensing systems for monitoring,
                                                                            free-access portals such as
             Has the project proponent included climate change              Interactive Atlas of IPCC or
             information available at different spatial and temporal        ThinkHazard!) improved the
             scales (e.g., climate change projections presented in          project's decision-making process
             national climate assessments or national communications        and a plan for incorporating new
             to the United Nations Framework on Climate Change) in its      climate change information into
             decision-making processes?                                     project decision-making.

4 Adapted from Gupta, J., C. Termeer, J., Klostermann, et al. 2010. "The Adaptive Capacity Wheel: A Method to Assess
the Inherent Characteristics of Institutions to Enable the Adaptive Capacity of Society." Environmental Science & Policy
13 (6): 459­71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2010.05.006

                                                                                                                                  22
                               2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Criteria    Adaptive Capacity                                             Supporting Evidence Examples

4)          Description:                                                  A report, sustainability agenda,
Leadership                                                                agreements, cooperative
            Long-term vision on climate change, or                        agreements, research proposals,
                                                                          consultancies, or other supporting
            Stimulus for action, entrepreneurship, and collaboration      documents in which the project
            from different stakeholders                                   proponent alone or in collaboration
                                                                          has communicated its performance
            Interpretation:                                               and impacts on a wide range of
                                                                          sustainability topics, including
            Has the project proponent developed actions on its own or     climate change and the risks and
            by collaborating with other stakeholders to address climate   opportunities facing the
            change impacts, or has the project proponent manifested       organization.
            in the vision or mission statements of the organization
            elements related to climate change impacts, adaptation,
            and mitigation?

            Description:

            Availability of climate change expertise, knowledge, and
            human labor force in the field of environmental sciences

5)          Availability of financial resources to support policy         A financial report(s) describing the
Resources   measures and financial incentives to address climate          human labor force and financial
            change                                                        resources that will be used to
                                                                          support climate change policy
            Interpretation:                                               measures.

            Has the project proponent included in its financial reports
            descriptions of both (i) the human labor force with
            knowledge of environmental sciences and (ii) financial
            resources to support policy measures to address climate
            change?

            Description:

6) Fair     Evidence of policies, practices, and behaviors that address   A document, report, or
governance  climate change effectively                                    communication in which the
                                                                          project proponent shows the set of
            Availability of accountability procedures to implement        indicators used to measure the
            climate change-orientated actions                             impact of its policies, practices,
                                                                          and behaviors or public access to
            Interpretation:                                               annual management reports where
                                                                          climate change actions are
            Has the project proponent included a set of indicators to     presented (for example, the
            assess the impact of policies, practices, and behaviors of    achievement of SDG targets)
            the organization that will address climate change relevant
            to the project activity and report on the project's progress
            against those indicators?

                                                                          23
                                                          2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Criteria        Adaptive Capacity                                              Supporting Evidence Examples

7)              Description:
Innovation
                Availability of novel solutions to reduce the threat, or take  Peer-reviewed literature or a
                advantage, of climate change                                   government agency report detailing
                                                                               novel solutions, activities, or
                Interpretation:                                                practices to reduce the threat of
                                                                               climate change or take advantage
                Has the project proponent implemented novel solutions to       of potential opportunities.
                reduce the threat or take advantage of climate change?

                Note that novel solutions may also include the application
                of ancestral or traditional practices that could prevent or
                reduce the impacts of adverse consequences from climate
                change.

Table 13. SLR risk score             SLR Impact Level
 Significance

                                     High (5)  Major (4)  Minor (3)            Low (2)  Insignificant (1)

Catastrophic (70% or greater loss    FAIL      30         20                   5        4

of carbon stocks)

Devastating (50% to less than        30        20         5                    4        3

70% loss of carbon stocks)

Major (25% to less than 50% loss     20        5          4                    3        2

of carbon stocks)

Minor (5% to less than 25% loss      5         4          3                    2        1

of carbon stocks)

Insignificant (less than 5% loss of

carbon stocks) or transient (full

recovery of lost carbon stocks       4         3          2                    1        1

expected within 10 years of any

event)

Not Applicable                       0         0          0                    0        0

                                                                                           24
                                                  2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

Table 14. SLR adaptation scores                                                                Reduction
 Type of Measure Description                                                                   Score

Ecosystem-based      Restoration strategies, creation of new natural buffer areas, preservation,
adaptation (EbA)     supporting inland migration of impacted coastal plant communities (e.g., 0.5
                     mangroves)

Land use planning,
public participation, Decision analysis, land use planning, public participation, livelihood

                                                                                                                                   0.5
and conflict resolution support and conflict resolution approaches
approaches

Protection barriers  Filling of beaches, piers, breakwaters, structures, and barriers against

(bioengineering)     flooding for protection and prevention of erosion, green and blue         0.6

                     infrastructure

Application of two or more measures listed above                                               0.25

None of the above                                                                              1

2.5 Step 2: Overall Non-Permanence Risk Rating and Buffer
      Determination

2.5.1 The overall non-permanence risk rating shall be determined using Table 15. The overall risk
          rating shall be rounded up to the nearest whole percent.

Table 15. Overall risk rating

Risk Category                                     Rating

a)             Internal Risk (from Table 5)

b)             External Risk (from

               Table 9)

c)             Natural Risk (from

               Table 11)

Overall Risk Rating = (a + b + c)

                                                                                                                                        25
                                       2 Risk Analysis and Buffer Determination

2.5.2 The minimum risk rating shall be 12, regardless of the risk rating calculated using Table 15.

2.5.3  Where the overall risk rating exceeds 60, project risk is deemed unacceptably high, and the
       project fails the risk analysis. These projects shall not be eligible for crediting until risks are
       adequately addressed or sufficient mitigation measures are implemented to lower the overall
       risk rating to less than or equal to 60. Further, where the sum of risk ratings for any risk
       category is greater than the following thresholds, the project fails the risk analysis and shall not
       be eligible for crediting (until risks are mitigated to result in totals below these thresholds):

       1) Internal risk threshold: 35

       2) External risk threshold: 20

       3) Natural risk threshold: 35

2.5.4  To determine the number of buffer credits that shall be deposited in the AFOLU pooled buffer
       account, the overall risk rating shall be converted to a percentage (e.g., an overall risk rating of
       35 converts to 35%). This percentage shall be multiplied by the net change in the project's
       carbon stocks (stated in the monitoring and verification report), as set out in the Registration
       and Issuance Process. Where a project is divided into more than one geographic area or cluster
       for risk analysis, the overall risk rating percentage for each area shall be multiplied by the net
       change in the project's carbon stocks (stated in the verification report) in the geographic area.

2.5.5  Buffer credits shall be deposited in the AFOLU pooled buffer account following the procedures
       set out in the Registration and Issuance Process. The same document sets out the rules and
       requirements for the release and cancellation of buffer credits from the AFOLU pooled buffer
       account.

                                                                                                     26
                                                                Document History

DOCUMENT HISTORY

Version Date  Comment

v5.0  16 Dec 2025 Updated version released under VCS Version 5

                                                                27
ABOUT VERRA

Verra sets the world's leading standards for climate action and sustainable development. We build
standards for activities as diverse as reducing deforestation, improving agricultural practices,
addressing plastic waste, and achieving gender equality. We manage programs to certify that these
activities achieve measurable high-integrity outcomes. We work with governments, businesses, and civil
society to advance the use of these standards, including through the development of markets.
Everything we do is in service of increasingly ambitious climate and sustainable development goals,
and an accelerated transition to a sustainable future.
Verra's certification programs include the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) Program and its Jurisdictional
and Nested REDD+ (JNR) framework, the Climate, Community & Biodiversity Standards (CCBS)
Program, the Sustainable Development Verified Impact Standard (SD VISta) Program, and the Plastic
Waste Reduction Program.

                                                                                                                                  28
