CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM

AR-TOOL14

Methodological tool
Estimation of carbon stocks and change in
carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities

Version 04.2
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                                         Page

1. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................  4

2. SCOPE, APPLICABILITY, AND ENTRY INTO FORCE ...........................................                                 4

2.1. Scope .............................................................................................................  4

2.2. Applicability ....................................................................................................   4

2.3. Entry into force ...............................................................................................     4

3. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION ................................................................................              4

4. PARAMETERS DETERMINED BY THE TOOL ........................................................                             5

5. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH CARBON STOCK AND CHANGE IN

CARBON STOCK MAY BE ESTIMATED AS ZERO................................................                                     6

6. ESTIMATING CHANGE IN CARBON STOCK IN TREES BETWEEN TWO

POINTS OF TIME.......................................................................................................     7

6.1. Difference of two independent stock estimations ..........................................                           7

6.2. Direct estimation of change by re-measurement of sample plots .................                                      8

6.3. Estimation by proportionate crown cover.......................................................                       10

6.4. Demonstration of "no-decrease" ....................................................................                  11

7. ESTIMATING CHANGE IN CARBON STOCK IN TREES IN A YEAR ....................                                              12

8. ESTIMATING CARBON STOCK IN TREES AT A POINT OF TIME .......................                                            13

8.1. Estimation by measurement of sample plots .................................................                          13

8.1.1. Stratified random sampling ...........................................................                             13

8.1.2. Double sampling ...........................................................................                        15

8.2. Estimation by modelling of tree growth and stand development ...................                                     17

8.3. Estimation by proportionate crown cover.......................................................                       17

8.4. Updating previous stock by direct estimation of change ...............................                               18

9. ESTIMATING CHANGE IN CARBON STOCK IN SHRUBS BETWEEN TWO

POINTS OF TIME.......................................................................................................     19

10. ESTIMATING CHANGE IN CARBON STOCK IN SHRUBS IN A YEAR .................                                               19

11. ESTIMATING CARBON STOCK IN SHRUBS AT A POINT OF TIME ....................                                             20

12. DATA AND PARAMETERS USED IN THE TOOL ...................................................                              21

12.1. Data and parameters not monitored ..............................................................                    21

                   2 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

12.2. Data and parameters monitored. ...................................................................  21

APPENDIX 1. METHODS OF PLOT BIOMASS MEASUREMENT................................                           23

APPENDIX 2. APPLYING UNCERTAINTY DISCOUNT ................................................                28

APPENDIX 3. CALCULATING CORRELATION COEFFICIENT AND SLOPE OF

REGRESSION ..........................................................................................     29

3 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

1. Introduction

1. This tool provides step-by-step methods for estimation of carbon stock in living biomass
         of trees and shrubs. For ex-ante (projected) estimation of tree biomass it applies tree
         growth and stand development models. For ex-post (actual) estimation of tree biomass it
         uses data from measurements conducted in sample plots. Remote sensing data may
         also be used in conjunction with data from measurements conducted in sample plots.
         Biomass of shrubs is estimated from shrub crown cover.

2. Scope, applicability, and entry into force

2.1. Scope

2. This tool can be used for estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in living
         biomass of trees and shrubs in an afforestation and reforestation (A/R) clean
         development mechanism (CDM) project activity. The tool is applicable for:

         (a) Estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in living biomass of trees
                   and shrubs in baseline;

         (b) Ex-ante estimation (projection) of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in
                   living biomass of trees and shrubs in project;

         (c) Ex-post estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in trees and
                   shrubs for monitoring of project activities.

2.2. Applicability

3. This tool has no internal applicability conditions.

2.3. Entry into force

4. The date of entry into force is the date of the publication of the EB 85 meeting report on
         24 July 2015.

3. Definitions and notation

5. The definitions contained in the Glossary of CDM terms shall apply.

6. For the purpose of this tool, the following definitions apply:

         (a) Uncertainty - is in the mean value of an estimated parameter equal to the
                   estimated standard error of the mean expanded at 90 per cent confidence level
                   divided by the mean value, expressed as percentage;

                   Example: The mean value of above-ground tree biomass per hectare is
                   estimated as 45.328 t d.m. ha-1 from a sample of size 34. Sample standard
                   deviation was 12.776 t d.m. ha-1. The estimated standard error of the mean
                   (SEM) is 12.776/ = 2.191 t d.m. ha-1. The SEM expanded at 90 per cent
                   confidence level is therefore = 2.191 x t(0.1,33) = 2.191 x 1.692 = 3.707 t d.m.
                   ha-1. This implies that the estimated mean has an uncertainty of (3.707/45.328)

                                                                  4 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

                   ×100 = 8.18 per cent.

                   Note. In this tool only sampling uncertainty is assessed and controlled.
                   Uncertainty in values obtained from direct measurement (e.g. measured diameter
                   of a tree) or values derived from models (e.g. biomass of a tree derived from its
                   diameter using an allometric equation) is not quantified. This type of uncertainty
                   should be managed through application of appropriate quality assurance and
                   quality control (QA/QC) methods, as explained in the parameter description
                   tables in section 12.

         (b) Species - can also refer to a species group when a species-specific biometric
                   parameter (e.g. biomass expansion factor), or a model (e.g. allometric equation),
                   is demonstrated to be applicable to more than one species;

         (c) Tree biomass - refers to above-ground and below-ground living biomass of
                   trees;

         (d) Shrub biomass - refers to above-ground and below-ground living biomass of
                   shrubs;

         (e) Plot biomass - refers to tree biomass per hectare in a plot;

         (f) Measurement of a sample plot - refers to the measurement of one or more
                   dimensions (e.g. diameter) of the trees in a sample plot, or measurement of a plot
                   parameter (e.g. basal area per hectare), and conversion of the measured tree
                   dimensions, or the measured plot parameter into plot biomass by using one of
                   the methods provided in Appendix 1;

         (g) Conservative value of a parameter - refers to the value which, when used in
                   calculations, is more likely to result in underestimation rather than overestimation
                   of the net anthropogenic GHG removals by sinks;

7. For reasons of consistency and readability, this tool uses the following conventions in
         naming of variables and parameters:

         (a) Symbols for unit quantities (e.g. per hectare quantities) use lower case letters
                   (e.g. bFOREST), whereas symbols for total quantities use uppercase letters
                   (e.g. BTREE);

         (b) Subscripts used for qualifying a variable or a parameter appear in upper case
                   letters (e.g. CSHRUB_PROJECT), whereas subscripts used for denoting indices appear
                   in lower case letters (e.g. CSHRUB_PROJECT,i).

8. This tool uses the following units in their abbreviated form:

         (a) Tonne dry matter is abbreviated as t d.m., and tonne dry matter per hectare is
                   abbreviated as t d.m. ha-1;

         (b) Tonne carbon dioxide equivalent is abbreviated as t CO2e.

4. Parameters determined by the tool

9. This tool provides procedures to determine the parameters listed in Table 1.

                                                                  5 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Table 2. Parameters determined by the tool

Parameter  Unit               Description
           t CO2e
                              Carbon stock in tree biomass within the project boundary at a
                              given point of time in year t

           t CO2e             Change in carbon stock in tree biomass within the project
                              boundary in year t

           t CO2e             Carbon stock in shrub biomass within the project boundary at
                              a given point of time in year t

           t CO2e             Change in carbon stock in shrub biomass within the project
                              boundary in year t

10. While applying this tool in an approved A/R CDM methodology, the following
         corresponding notations should be used:

(a) In the baseline scenario:

           for     and                       for

           for                and                 for

(b) In the project scenario:

           for     and                       for

           for                 and                for

5. Conditions under which carbon stock and change in
      carbon stock may be estimated as zero

11. Carbon stock in trees in the baseline can be accounted as zero if all of the following
         conditions are met:

         (a) The pre-project trees are neither harvested, nor cleared, nor removed throughout
                   the crediting period of the project activity;

         (b) The pre-project trees do not suffer mortality because of competition from trees
                   planted in the project, or damage because of implementation of the project
                   activity, at any time during the crediting period of the project activity;

         (c) The pre-project trees are not inventoried along with the project trees in monitoring
                   of carbon stocks but their continued existence, consistent with the baseline
                   scenario, is monitored throughout the crediting period of the project activity.

12. Changes in carbon stocks in trees and shrubs in the baseline may be accounted as zero
         for those lands for which the project participants can demonstrate, through documentary
         evidence or through participatory rural appraisal (PRA), that one or more of the following
         indicators apply:

         (a) Observed reduction in topsoil depth (e.g. as shown by root exposure, presence of
                   pedestals, exposed sub-soil horizons);

                                    6 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

         (b) Presence of gully, sheet or rill erosion; or landslides, or other forms of mass-
                   movement erosion;

         (c) Presence of plant species locally known to be indicators of infertile land;

         (d) Land comprises of bare sand dunes, or other bare lands;

         (e) Land contains contaminated soils, mine spoils, or highly alkaline or saline soils;

         (f) Land is subjected to periodic cycles (e.g. slash-and-burn, or clearing-regrowing
                   cycles) so that the biomass oscillates between a minimum and a maximum value
                   in the baseline;

         (g) Conditions (a), (b) and (c) under paragraph 11 apply.

13. For the purpose of ex-ante estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in the
         project scenario, change in carbon stock of shrubs may be estimated as zero.

6. Estimating change in carbon stock in trees between two
      points of time

14. Change in carbon stock in trees between two points of time is estimated by using one of
         the following methods or a combination thereof:

         (a) Difference of two independent stock estimations;

         (b) Direct estimation of change by re-measurement of sample plots;

         (c) Estimation by proportionate crown cover;

         (d) Demonstration of "no-decrease".

6.1. Difference of two independent stock estimations

15. Under this method, change in carbon stock in trees is estimated as the difference
         between two successive and independent carbon stock estimations.

         Note. This is method is efficient when the correlation between the plot biomass values
         on the two occasions is absent or weak (e.g. when there has been harvest or
         disturbance in a stratum after the first estimation, resulting in spatial re-distribution of
         tree biomass in the stratum).

16. Under this method, the change in carbon stock in trees and the associated uncertainty
         are estimated as follows:

                                                                                                              Equation (1)

(     )(     )        Equation (2)

   |      |

             7 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Where:       = Change in carbon stock in trees during the period between two
  ,              points of time t1 and t2; t CO2e

             = Carbon stock in trees as estimated at time t1; t CO2e

             Note 1. At the first verification  is set equal to the carbon

             stock in the pre-project tree biomass (                            ).

             However, this may be set equal to zero, if all of the conditions

             specified under paragraph 10 are met.

             Note 2. Even if              was made conservative at the time of

             previous verification, it is the estimated (undiscounted) value of

             that is used here.

             = Carbon stock in trees as estimated at time t2; t CO2e

             = Uncertainty in

             = Uncertainties in           and   respectively

17. Carbon stock in trees at a point of time is estimated by using one of the applicable
         methods provided in section 8.

18. If  estimated from Equation (2) is greater than 10 per cent,      is made

conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in

Appendix 2.

6.2. Direct estimation of change by re-measurement of sample plots

19. This method is applicable only in ex-post estimation of change in carbon stock in trees
         for monitoring of project activities. Under this method, the same sample plots are
         measured on two successive occasions and the plot-level change in biomass is obtained
         by subtracting the plot biomass on the first occasion from the plot biomass on the
         second occasion.

         Note. This is method is efficient when there is a significant correlation between the plot
         biomass values on the two occasions (e.g. when there has been no harvest or
         disturbance in a stratum and therefore no significant spatial re-distribution of biomass
         has occurred in the stratum after the first estimation).

20. Under this method, the change in carbon stock and the associated uncertainty are
         estimated as follows:

                                                                      Equation (3)

                                                                      Equation (4)

                                 8 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

                                                                                               Equation (5)
        

                                                                  Equation (6)

          

          |  |

Where:

             = Change in carbon stock in trees between two successive
                 measurements; t CO2e

             = Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t d.m.)-1

             A default value of 0.47 is used unless transparent and verifiable
             information can be provided to justify a different value.

             = Change in tree biomass within the biomass estimation strata;
                 t d.m.

             = Sum of areas of the biomass estimation strata; ha

             = Mean change in tree biomass per hectare within the biomass
                 estimation strata; t d.m. ha-1

             = Ratio of the area of stratum i to the sum of areas of biomass

             estimation strata (i.e.    / ); dimensionless

             = Mean change in carbon stock per hectare in tree biomass in
                 stratum i; t d.m. ha-1

             = Uncertainty in

             = Two-sided Student's t-value for a confidence level of 90 per cent
                 and degrees of freedom equal to n ­ M, where n is total number of
                 sample plots within the tree biomass estimation strata, and M is
                 the total number of tree biomass estimation strata

             = Variance of mean change in tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;
                 (t d.m. ha-1)2

             = Number of sample plots, in stratum i, in which tree biomass was
                 re-measured

21. Mean change in tree biomass per hectare in a stratum and the associated variance are
         estimated as follows:

                                                                  Equation (7)

                               9 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

                (        )                                        Equation (8)

             (     )

Where:

             = Mean change in tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1

             = Change in tree biomass per hectare in plot p in stratum i;
                 t d.m. ha-1

             = Variance of mean change in tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;
                 (t d.m. ha-1)2

             = Number of sample plots, in stratum i, in which tree biomass was
                 re-measured

22. If  estimated from Equation (6) is greater than 10 per cent,  is made

conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in

Appendix 2.

23. Tree biomass per hectare in a sample plot is estimated by applying one of the plot
         measurement methods provided in Appendix 1.

6.3. Estimation by proportionate crown cover

24. This method is applicable only in ex-ante estimation of change in carbon stock in trees in
         the baseline where the mean pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20 per cent of the
         threshold tree crown cover reported by the host Party under paragraph 8 of the annex to
         decision 5/CMP.1

         Example. The host Party has reported a threshold tree crown cover of 30 per cent to
         define `forest' for the purposes of the CDM. The method of estimation by proportionate
         crown cover is applicable only if the mean pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20
         per cent of 30 per cent (i.e. less than 6 per cent).

25. Under this method, the change in carbon stock in trees in the baseline is estimated as
         follows:

                                                                                               Equation (9)
             

                      (     )                                     Equation (10)

Where:

             = Mean annual change in carbon stock in trees in the baseline;
                 t CO2e yr-1

             = Mean annual change in carbon stock in trees in the baseline, in
                 baseline stratum i; t CO2e yr-1

                                          10 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

= Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t.d.m.)-1.

    A default value of 0.47 t C (t.d.m.)-1 is used unless transparent and
    verifiable information can be provided to justify a different value.

= Default mean annual increment of above-ground biomass in forest

    in the region or country where the A/R CDM project activity is
    located; t d.m. ha-1 yr-1.

Values of      are taken from Table 3A.1.5 of the IPCC Good

Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry

(IPCC GPG-LULUCF 2003) unless transparent and verifiable

information can be provided to justify different values.

Note. Tree biomass may reach a steady state in which biomass
growth becomes zero or insignificant, either because of biological
maturity of trees or because the rate of anthropogenic biomass
extraction from the area is equal to the rate of biomass growth.
Therefore, this parameter should be taken to be zero after the year
in which tree biomass in the baseline reaches a steady state. The
year in which tree biomass in the baseline reaches a steady-state
is taken to be the 20th year from the start of the CDM project
activity, unless transparent and verifiable information can be
provided to justify a different year.

= Root-shoot ratio for the trees in the baseline; dimensionless.

A default value of 0.25 is used unless transparent and verifiable
information can be provided to justify a different value.

= Crown cover of trees in the baseline, in baseline stratum i, at the

start of the A/R CDM project activity, expressed as a fraction (e.g.

10 per cent crown cover implies  = 0.10);

dimensionless

= Area of baseline stratum i, delineated on the basis of tree crown
    cover at the start of the A/R CDM project activity; ha

6.4. Demonstration of "no-decrease"

26. This method is applicable only in ex-post estimation of change in carbon stock in trees
         for monitoring of project activities. Project participants may, at the time of a verification,
         demonstrate that tree biomass in one or more strata has not decreased relative to the
         tree biomass at the time of the previous verification, by proving that:

         (a) No harvest has occurred in the stratum since the previous verification;

         (b) The stratum was not affected by any disturbance (e.g. pest, fire) that would
                   decrease the carbon stock in trees;

         (c) Remote sensing data or inventory data, including participatory inventory or
                   participatory photo-mapping data, demonstrate that tree crown cover in the
                   stratum has not decreased since the previous verification.

               11 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

27. Where all the three conditions above are demonstrated to have been met in a stratum,
         the change in carbon stock in trees in that stratum since the previous verification may be
         conservatively estimated as zero.

         Note. This method is efficient when project participants are required to submit a
         verification and certification report at a point of time when the biomass increase in the
         project since the previous verification may not be large enough to justify the cost of
         conducting an inventory (e.g. when periodic verification and certification is required to re-
         validate lCERs already issued and significant number of new lCERs is not expected).

7. Estimating change in carbon stock in trees in a year

28. Change in carbon stock in trees in a year (annual change) between two successive
         verifications is estimated on the assumption of linear change.

29. Change in carbon stock in trees in a year is estimated as follows:

                                                                                                            Equation (11)

Where:  = Change in carbon stock in trees within the project boundary in
T           year t; t CO2e

        = Carbon stock in trees within the project boundary at time t2;
            t CO2e.

            Note. Where estimation of carbon stock in tree biomass at time t2
            is carried out by applying different methods in different strata,

                       is set equal to the sum of carbon stocks in all the strata in
            which the project area is divided.

        = Carbon stock in trees within the project boundary at time t1;
            t CO2e.

            Note. Where estimation of carbon stock in tree biomass at time t1
            is carried out by applying different methods in different strata,

                       is set equal to the sum of carbon stocks in all the strata in
            which the project area is divided.

        = Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 ­ t1); yr.

            Note 1. Value of T does not have to be a whole number (e.g. an
            interval of 4 years and 5 months implies T = 4.417 yr).

            Note 2. Estimation of change in carbon stock in trees by
            proportionate crown cover (see section 6.3) results in an annual
            change estimate and hence Equation (11) does not apply under
            this method.

        12 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

8. Estimating carbon stock in trees at a point of time

30. Carbon stock in trees at a point of time is estimated by using one of the following
         methods or a combination thereof:

(a) Estimation by measurement of sample plots;

(b) Estimation by modelling of tree growth and stand development;

(c) Estimation by proportionate crown cover;

(d) Updating the previous stock by independent measurement of change.

31. When estimation is carried out by methods (a), (c) or (d) above, the date of last
         measurement of sample plot, or estimation of crown cover, is considered to be the date
         of estimation of carbon stock, even if the full process of measurement extends over a
         period of time.

32. Where estimation of carbon stock in trees at a given point of time in year t is carried out

by applying different methods in different strata, the value of  is set equal to the

sum of carbon stocks in all the strata in which the project area was divided.

8.1. Estimation by measurement of sample plots

33. Under this method, carbon stock in trees is estimated on the basis of measurements of
         sample plots. Sample plots are installed in one or more strata. Two sampling designs are
         available:

         (a) Stratified random sampling;

         (b) Double sampling.

8.1.1. Stratified random sampling

34. Under this method, random sample plots are installed in the strata (e.g. systematic
         sampling with a random start) and measured.

         Note. This method is more efficient when the sample plots are optimally allocated to the
         strata keeping in view the expected mean tree biomass per hectare and its variability in
         the strata. Number of sample plots and their allocation to strata may be estimated by
         using the A/R methodological tool "Calculation of the number of sample plots for
         measurements within A/R CDM project activities".

         Example 1. At the time of verification, it is known that out of eight parcels of plantation
         land, three have been harvested in the last two years. Hence the mean tree biomass per
         hectare in these parcels is low and is relatively homogeneous. Hence these three
         parcels are treated as one stratum. Of the remaining five parcels, two parcels had poor
         tree growth compared to the other three. Thus these five parcels are treated as two
         separate strata.

         Example 2. In a forest plantation raised through assisted natural regeneration, the tree
         biomass is seen to be distributed unevenly throughout the project area. Using satellite
         data it is seen that the distribution of the tree crown cover (which is expected to have a
         positive correlation with tree biomass) has clearly discernible patterns. Strata boundaries

13 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

         are therefore delineated on the basis tree crown cover estimated from the remote
         sensing data.
35. Mean carbon stock in trees within the tree biomass estimation strata and the associated
         uncertainty are estimated as follows (all time-dependent quantities relate to the time of
         measurement):

                                                                                                            Equation (12)

                                                                                                            Equation (13)

                                                                                                            Equation (14)
                    

                                                                                                            Equation (15)
                         

Where:

        = Carbon stock in trees in the tree biomass estimation strata;
            t CO2e

        = Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t d.m.)-1.

        A default value of 0.47 is used unless transparent and verifiable
        information can be provided to justify a different value.

        = Tree biomass in the tree biomass estimation strata; t d.m.

        = Sum of areas of the tree biomass estimation strata; ha

        = Mean tree biomass per hectare in the tree biomass estimation
            strata; t d.m. ha-1

        = Ratio of the area of stratum i to the sum of areas of tree biomass

        estimation strata (i.e.     / ); dimensionless

        = Mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1

        = Uncertainty in

        = Two-sided Student's t-value for a confidence level of 90 per cent
            and degrees of freedom equal to n ­ M, where n is total number of
            sample plots within the tree biomass estimation strata and M is the
            total number of tree biomass estimation strata

        = Variance of tree biomass per hectare across all sample plots in
            stratum i; (t d.m. ha-1)2

        = Number of sample plots in stratum i.

                          14 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

36. Mean tree biomass per hectare in a stratum and the associated variance are estimated
         as follows:

                                                                  Equation (16)

                (     )                                           Equation (17)

             (     )

Where:

             = Mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1
             = Tree biomass per hectare in plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1

             = Variance of mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;
                 (t d.m. ha-1)2

             = Number of sample plots in stratum i.

37. If estimated from Equation (15) is greater than 10 per cent,             is made

conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in

Appendix 2.

38. Tree biomass per hectare in a plot is estimated by using one of the plot measurement
         methods provided in Appendix 1.

8.1.2. Double sampling

39. Under this method, a secondary variable is measured in all the sample plots in a stratum
         and tree biomass is measured in a sub-set of the same sample plots. The mean biomass
         and its variance are estimated from the measured plot biomass values in the sub-sample
         and are adjusted through regression of the plot biomass values against the observed
         plot values of the secondary variable in the sub-sample.

40. This method is applicable only if there is a linear relationship between the plot biomass
         values and the plot values of the secondary variable (i.e. the best-fit curve is a straight
         line) within the range of the values.

         Note. This method is efficient when spatial distribution of tree biomass in the area is
         highly heterogeneous and does not show `block patterns' at significant scale and thus
         does not allow delineation of strata. The method is more efficient when the cost of
         obtaining the values of the secondary variable is low compared to cost of measurement
         of plot biomass, and the correlation between the secondary variable and the measured
         plot biomass values is high.

         Example 1. Spatial distribution of tree biomass in a stratum was highly heterogeneous
         and it was not efficient to delineate tree biomass sub-strata. The project participants
         measured basal area in 300 sample plots. In a sub-sample of 50 plots they also
         measured plot biomass. This double sampling design reduced the variance of the
         estimated mean by one half. To achieve the same precision without double sampling it

                      15 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

         would have been necessary to conduct plot biomass measurement in 200 plots which
         would have been costlier.

         Example 2. In a large project area the spatial distribution of tree biomass was highly
         heterogeneous and it was not efficient to delineate tree biomass strata. However,
         remotely sensed satellite data covering the area was available at a very low cost. An
         index, namely, Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), was constructed from
         this data which was found to have approximately linear relationship with the per-hectare
         tree biomass. A double sampling design was adopted with construction of NDVI in 2000
         sample plots and measurement of diameter of all trees in 150 sample plots selected from
         the 2000 plots using systematic selection with a random start. This double sampling
         design reduced the variance of the estimated mean by one third. To achieve the same
         precision by measuring fixed-area plots alone would have required measurement of 300
         fix-area sample plots which would have been costlier.

41. Equations (12) to (15) also apply in this method for aggregating the mean and its
         variance over the strata. However, for each stratum in which double sampling is applied,
         the following equations apply instead of Equations (16) and (17):

                (  )             Equation (18)

             (        )          Equation (19)

          (     )        (( ) )

Where:    = Mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1

          = Tree biomass per hectare in plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1
 
          = Number of sample plots in the sub-sample

          = Slope of the regression line of tree biomass per hectare in a
              sample plot against the secondary variable value of the plot

          = Mean value of the secondary variable across all the sample plots

          = Mean value of the secondary variable across the sub-sample of
              sample plots in which tree biomass is also measured

          = Variance of mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;
              (t d.m. ha-1)2

          = Ratio of number of sample plots in the sub-sample to the number
              of sample plots in the sample ( <1)

          = Coefficient of correlation between the secondary variable and the
              tree biomass per hectare in a sample plot, estimated across all the
              sample plots in the sub-sample

42. The slope of the regression and the coefficient of correlation are calculated as
         explained in Appendix 3.

                      16 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

43. Tree biomass per hectare in a sample plot is estimated by using one of the plot
         measurement methods provided in Appendix 1.

44. If estimated from Equation (15) is greater than 10 per cent,  is made

conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in

Appendix 2.

8.2. Estimation by modelling of tree growth and stand development

45. This method is used for ex-ante estimation (projection) of carbon stock in tree biomass.
         Under this method existing data are used in combination with tree growth models to
         predict the growth of trees and the development of the tree stand over time.

46. Stand parameters such as stocking (e.g. number of stems per hectare or basal area per
         hectare), age-class structure, and species composition at different points of time are
         simulated from assumed (planned) tree planting and management practices (e.g.
         planting density, survival rate, thinning and pruning operations and their timing).

47. Tree growth (e.g. diameter or height increment) is simulated by taking into account local
         tree-growth data from past experience (e.g. age-diameter curves, yield tables, yield
         curves) while also considering relevant site factors (e.g. soil, terrain, slope, aspect,
         precipitation) and stand parameters.

48. Ex-ante estimation (projection) of carbon stock in tree biomass is not subjected to
         uncertainty control, although the project participants should use the best available data
         and models that apply to the project site and the tree species.

8.3. Estimation by proportionate crown cover

49. This method is applicable only for estimation of the pre-project carbon stock in tree
         biomass in the baseline where the mean pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20 per
         cent of the threshold tree crown cover reported by the host Party under paragraph 8 of
         the annex to decision 5/CMP.1.

         Example. The host Party has reported a threshold tree crown cover of 30 per cent for
         defining `forest' for the purposes of the CDM. This method is applicable only if the mean
         pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20 per cent of 30 per cent (i.e. less than 6 per
         cent).

50. Carbon stock in trees is estimated on the basis of tree crown cover at the time of the
         start of the project (the pre-project tree crown cover). The area within the project
         boundary is stratified by pre-project tree crown cover.

51. Under this method, carbon stock in tree biomass is estimated as follows:

                                                                                  Equation (20)


             (         )                                          Equation (21)

             17 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Where

        = Carbon stock in pre-project tree biomass; t CO2e

        = Carbon stock in pre-project tree biomass in stratum i; t CO2e
        = Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t.d.m.)-1.

            A default value of 0.47 t C (t.d.m.)-1 is used.

        = Mean above-ground biomass in forest in the region or country
            where the A/R CDM project is located; t d.m. ha-1

        Values from Table 3A.1.4 of IPCC GPG-LULUCF 2003 are used
        unless transparent and verifiable information can be provided to
        justify different values.

        = Root-shoot ratio for trees in the baseline; dimensionless.

        A default value of 0.25 is used unless transparent and verifiable
        information can be provided to justify a different value.

        = Crown cover of trees in baseline stratum i, at the start of the

        A/R CDM project activity, expressed as a fraction (e.g. 10 per cent

        crown cover implies  = 0.10); dimensionless

        = Area of baseline stratum i, delineated on the basis of tree crown
            cover at the start of the A/R CDM project activity; ha

8.4. Updating previous stock by direct estimation of change

52. Under this method, the new carbon stock in trees is obtained by adding the change in
         carbon stock in trees estimated by re-measurement of plots (see section 6.2) to the
         carbon stock estimated at the previous verification.

         Note. This method is efficient when the number of tCERs is to be estimated and the
         method of direct estimation of change in carbon stock by re-measurement of sample
         plots is efficient. Since tCERs are based on total carbon stock, the carbon stock
         estimated at the previous verification must be updated by adding the change in carbon
         stock to arrive at the carbon stock at the second verification.

53. Under this method, carbon stock in trees in a stratum and the associated uncertainty are
         estimated as follows:

                                                            Equation (22)

(       )(  )                                               Equation (23)

Where:

        = Carbon stock in trees at time t2; t CO2e

            18 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

        = Carbon stock in trees as estimated at time t1; t CO2e

        Note. Even if                   was made conservative at the time of the

        previous verification, it is the estimated (undiscounted) value of

        that is used here.

        = Change in carbon stock in trees during the period between times t1
            and t2; t CO2e

uC      = Uncertainty in

,       = Uncertainties in              and  respectively

54. If estimated from Equation (23) is greater than 10 per cent,            is made

conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in
Appendix 2.

9. Estimating change in carbon stock in shrubs between
      two points of time

55. Change in carbon stock in shrubs between two points of time is estimated as follows:

                                                                  Equation (24)

Where:

        = Change in carbon stock in shrub biomass during the period
            between times t1 and t2; t CO2-e

        = Carbon stock in shrub biomass at time t2; t CO2-e

        = Carbon stock in shrub biomass at time t1; t CO2-e

56. Carbon stock in shrub biomass at a point of time is estimated by using the method
         provided in section 10.

57. Where, by applying mutatis mutandis the "no decrease" method provided under section

6.4 to shrubs, it can be shown that there has been no decrease in carbon stock in

shrubs in one or more strata since the previous verification, the value of        for

those strata can be estimated as zero.

10. Estimating change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year

58. Change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year (annual change) between two successive
         verifications is estimated on the assumption of linear change.

59. Change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year is estimated as follows:

                                                                  Equation (25)

                            19 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Where:  = Change in carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary in
T           year t between times t1 and t2; t CO2-e

        = Carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary at time t2;
            t CO2e

        = Carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary at time t1;
            t CO2e

        = Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 ­ t1); yr

            Note. Value of T does not have to be a whole number (e.g. an
            interval of 4 years and 5 months implies T = 4.417 yr).

11. Estimating carbon stock in shrubs at a point of time

60. Carbon stock in shrubs at a point of time is estimated on the basis of shrub crown cover.
         The area within the project boundary is stratified by shrub crown cover. Those areas
         where the shrub crown cover is less than 5 per cent are treated as a single stratum and
         the shrub biomass in this stratum is estimated as zero.

61. For the strata with a shrub crown cover of greater than 5 per cent, carbon stock in
         shrubs is estimated as follows:

                        Equation (26)

        (  )

Where:                                                                             Equation (27)

        = Carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary at a given point
            of time in year t; t CO2-e

        = Carbon fraction of shrub biomass; t C (t.d.m.)-1.
            A default value of 0.47 is used unless transparent and verifiable
            information can be provided to justify a different value.

        = Root-shoot ratio for shrubs; dimensionless.
            The default value of 0.40 is used unless transparent and verifiable
            information can be provided to justify a different value.

        = Area of shrub biomass estimation stratum i; ha
        = Shrub biomass per hectare in shrub biomass estimation stratum i;

            t d.m. ha-1

              20 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

= Ratio of shrub biomass per hectare in land having a shrub crown
    cover of 1.0 (i.e. 100 per cent) and the default above-ground
    biomass content per hectare in forest in the region/country where
    the A/R CDM project activity is located; dimensionless.

A default value of 0.10 should be used unless transparent and
verifiable information can be provided to justify a different value.

= Default above-ground biomass content in forest in the

    region/country where the A/R CDM project activity is located;
    t d.m. ha-1.

Values from Table 3A.1.4 of IPCC GPG-LULUCF 2003 are used
unless transparent and verifiable information can be provided to
justify different values.

= Crown cover of shrubs in shrub biomass estimation stratum i at

the time of estimation, expressed as a fraction (e.g. 10 per cent

crown cover implies                           = 0.10); dimensionless

12. Data and parameters used in the tool

62. This section describes the requirements for the data and parameters used in this tool.
         The requirements contained in the following data description tables should be treated as
         an integral part of the tool.

12.1. Data and parameters not monitored

63. The values, sources, and requirements for data and parameters which are not subject to
         monitoring are provided in the text of the tool along with the equations in which these are
         used.

12.2. Data and parameters monitored.

64. The requirements for data and parameters subject to monitoring are provided in the
         tables below.

Data / Parameter table 1. Area of land

Data / Parameter:          ,            ,
Data unit:
Description:           Ha
Source of data:
Measurement            Area of a sample plot; area of a stratum
procedures (if any):
                       Field measurement
Monitoring frequency:
QA/QC procedures:      Standard operating procedures (SOPs) prescribed under national
                       forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these, SOPs from
                       published handbooks, or from the IPCC GPG LULUCF 2003, are
                       applied

                       At every verification

                       Quality control/quality assurance (QA/QC) procedures prescribed
                       under national forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these,
                       QA/QC procedures from published handbooks, or from the IPCC
                       GPG LULUCF 2003, are applied

                              21 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Data / Parameter table 2. Shrub crown cover

Data / Parameter:      Dimensionless
Data unit:
Description:           Crown cover of shrubs in shrub biomass stratum i
Source of data:
Measurement            Field measurement
procedures (if any):
                       Considering that the biomass in shrubs is smaller than the biomass in
Monitoring frequency:  trees, a simplified method of measurement may be used for
QA/QC procedures:      estimating shrub crown cover. Ocular estimation of crown cover may
                       be carried out or any other method such as the line transect method
Comment:               or the relascope method may be applied

                       At every verification

                       Quality control/quality assurance (QA/QC) procedures prescribed
                       under national forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these,
                       QA/QC procedures from published handbooks, or from the IPCC
                       GPG LULUCF 2003, are applied

                       When land is subjected to periodic cycles (e.g. slash-and-burn, or
                       clearing-regrowing cycles) so that the shrub crown cover oscillates
                       between a minimum and maximum values in the baseline, an
                       average shrub crown cover equal to 0.5 is used unless transparent
                       and verifiable information can be provided to justify a different value

Data / Parameter table 3. Tree crown cover

Data / Parameter:      Dimensionless
Data unit:
Description:           Crown cover of trees in the baseline stratum i
Source of data:
Measurement            Field measurement
procedures (if any):
                       Considering that the biomass in trees in the baseline is smaller
Monitoring frequency:  compared to the biomass in trees in the project, a simplified method
QA/QC procedures:      of measurement may be used for estimating tree crown cover. Ocular
                       estimation of tree crown cover may be carried out or any other
Comment:               method such as the line transect method or the relascope method
                       may be applied

                       Measured only once (at the beginning of the project)

                       Quality control/quality assurance (QA/QC) procedures prescribed
                       under national forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these,
                       QA/QC procedures from published handbooks, or from the IPCC
                       GPG LULUCF 2003, are applied

                       When land is subjected to periodic cycles (e.g. slash-and-burn, or
                       clearing-regrowing cycles) so that the tree crown cover oscillates
                       between a minimum and maximum values in the baseline, the value
                       of this parameter should be set equal to half the maximum tree crown
                       cover that would be achieved under the cycle

                       22 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Appendix 1. Methods of plot biomass measurement

1. This appendix provides methods for measurement of tree biomass per hectare in a
         sample plot (the plot biomass value). Plot biomass values are estimated from direct or
         indirect measurements conducted on trees in the sample plot. Table 1 presents the type
         of measurements and the methods for converting these measurements into tree
         biomass.

Table 1. Plot measurements and their conversion to tree biomass

            Step                    Fixed area plots                 Variable area plots
Step 1. Measurement                                          Basal area per hectare
(what is measured)       Individual tree dimension (e.g.
                         diameter at breast height,          1. Using allometric equations
Step 2. Conversion       diameter at root collar, tree             based on basal area; or
(how measurements        height)
are converted into tree                                      2. Using biomass expansion
biomass)                 1. Using allometric equations             factors; or
                               based on tree dimensions; or
                                                             3. Combination of 1 and 2
                         2. Using biomass expansion
                               factors; or

                         3. Combination of 1 and 2

Note. Sampling by variable area plot method is also termed as `angle count sampling' in forest
inventory literature.

1. Measurement of fixed area plots

2. In this method, sample plots of the same size (e.g. or of a hectare) are installed in a

         stratum. All trees in a sample plot above a minimum dimension are measured and the
         biomass of each tree is estimated. The minimum dimension selected can be low (e.g. a
         diameter of 2 cm) or high (e.g. a diameter of 10 cm) depending upon the applicability of
         models (e.g. allometric equations or volume equations) to be used for conversion of the
         tree dimension into tree volume or tree biomass, and upon cost-effectiveness of
         measurement.

3. The biomass of the individual trees is added and the sum is divided by the area of the
         sample plot to obtain the plot biomass value.

         Note. Where the number of saplings with diameter below the range of diameter
         applicable to the allometric equation is high, the mean biomass of the saplings in a
         sample plot can be estimated as follows: (1) Determine the diameter mid-way between
         the diameter of the smallest sapling existing and the smallest diameter allowed by the
         allometric equation. (2) Harvest from outside the plot area a few saplings having
         diameter close to the mid-way diameter and obtain the mean biomass per sapling; (3)
         Count all the saplings in the sample plot and multiply this number by the mean sapling
         biomass to obtain their contribution to the plot biomass.

                         23 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

4. The plot biomass value (i.e. per-hectare tree biomass at the centre of the plot) is
         estimated as follows (all time-dependent variables relate to the time of measurement):

                                                                                                              Equation (1)

                                                                                              Equation (2)
        

                                                                                            Equation (3)
        

Where:

           = Tree biomass per hectare in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1
           = Tree biomass in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m.
           = Size of sample plot in stratum i; ha
           = Biomass of trees of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m.
           = Biomass of tree l of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m.

5. Biomass of a tree in a sample plot is estimated by using one of the following equations:

        (     )(     )               Equation (4)

           (      )            (  )  Equation (5)

Where:

              = Biomass of tree l of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t
                  d.m.

                     24 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

(        )  = Above-ground biomass of the tree returned by the
      (
            allometric equation for species j relating the measurements

            of tree l to the above-ground biomass of the tree; t d.m.

            Note. The allometric equation used may be based on
            different units of inputs and outputs. For example, input
            values of diameter at breast height (dbh) may be in inches
            and output of biomass may be in pounds, rather than dbh
            in cm and biomass in kg or t d.m. In such a case, the
            function should be applied consistently (e.g. convert the
            dbh values from centimetre to inch units, obtain the tree
            biomass in pound, and then convert the biomass into
            metric tonne).

            = Root-shoot ratio for tree species j; dimensionless

                                          (                       )

            The value of is estimated as

            where is the above-ground tree biomass per hectare (in
            t d.m. ha-1), unless transparent and verifiable information

            can be provided to justify a different value.

            Note. If trees have grown as coppice regeneration after a
            harvest, then the value of should be multiplied by a

            factor equal to  /  or 1, whichever is greater,

            where            is the volume per hectare of trees

            harvested and    is the volume per hectare of trees

            standing in the plot at the time of measurement.

            ) = Stem volume of tree l of species j in sample plot p of

                     stratum i, estimated from the tree dimension(s) as entry
                     data into a volume table or volume equation; m3

                Note. Where the volume table or volume equation predicts
                under-bark volume (i.e. wood volume, rather than gross
                stem volume), suitable correction should be applied to
                estimate the over-bark volume.

            = Density (over-bark) of tree species j; t d.m. m-3

            Values are taken from Table 3A.1.9 of IPCC GPG-
            LULUCF 2003 unless transparent and verifiable
            information can be provided to justify different values.

            Note. Where density (specific gravity) of the bark of a tree
            species is different from the density of the wood, suitable
            correction should be applied to estimate a conservative
            value of the overall (over-bark) density of tree stem.

                   25 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

        = Biomass expansion factor for conversion of tree stem
            biomass to above-ground tree biomass, for tree species j;
            dimensionless

        For ex-ante estimation, the value of        is selected by

        applying, mutatis mutandis, the procedure described in

        paragraph 7 below.

        For ex-post estimation the conservative default value of
        1.15 is used, unless transparent and verifiable information
        can be provided to justify a different value.

6. For ex-ante estimation the allometric equation, or volume table or volume equation
         applied to a tree species is selected from the following sources (the most preferred
         source being listed first):

         (a) Existing data applicable to local situation (e.g. represented by similar ecological
                   conditions);

(b) National data (e.g. from national forest inventory or national greenhouse gas
         (GHG) inventory);

         (c) Data from neighbouring countries with similar conditions;

         (d) Globally applicable data.

7. For ex-post estimation, the allometric equation used must be demonstrated to be
         appropriate for the purpose of estimation of tree biomass by applying the tool
         "Demonstrating appropriateness of allometric equations for estimation of aboveground
         tree biomass in A/R CDM project activities", and the volume table or volume equation
         used must be demonstrated to be appropriate for the purpose of estimation of tree
         biomass by applying the tool "Demonstrating appropriateness of volume equations for
         estimation of aboveground tree biomass in A/R CDM project activities".

2. Measurement of variable plots

8. This method estimates tree biomass per hectare from the basal area per hectare and
         therefore does not require individual tree measurements. Tree basal area is obtained at
         the centre of a sample plot using an angle-count instrument (e.g. a wedge prism or a
         relascope).

9. Tree biomass in a plot is estimated as follows:

                                                                                              Equation (6)
        

Where:

        = Tree biomass per hectare in sample plot p of stratum i;
            t d.m. ha-1

                                  26 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

                                   = Tree biomass per hectare of species j in sample plot p of
                                        stratum i; t d.m. ha-1

10. Tree biomass per hectare of a species in a sample plot is estimated by using one of the
         following equations:

        ( )(  )               Equation (7)

        ()       (         )  Equation (8)

Where:

        = Tree biomass per hectare of species j in sample plot p of stratum i;
            t d.m. ha-1

()      = Above-ground tree biomass per hectare in plot p returned by the

            allometric equation for species j relating the basal area of the plot
            to the above-ground tree biomass per hectare; t d.m. ha-1

( ) = Stem volume per hectare of trees of species j in sample plot p of

                   stratum i estimated by using the basal area of the plot as entry
                   data into a volume table or volume equation; m3 ha-1

11. All other symbols have the same meanings and requirements as in Equations (4) and
         (5).

12. Requirements under paragraphs 7 and 8 above also apply, mutatis mutandis, in respect
         of allometric equations and volume functions used under this method.

                 27 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Appendix 2. Applying uncertainty discount

1. Estimates with high uncertainty can be used in methodologies only if such estimates are
         conservative. This appendix provides a procedure for applying discount factors in order
         to make the mean estimated values of parameters conservative.

2. When the uncertainty in the estimated mean value of a parameter is more than 10 per
         cent, the estimated mean value is either increased or decreased by a percentage of the
         uncertainty. Table 1 provides the uncertainty discount factors to be applied for different
         ranges of uncertainty.

Table 1. Uncertainty discount factors

Uncertainty  Discount (% of U)                              How applied
U  10%       0%
10 < U  15   25%                       Example:
15 < U  20   50%                       Estimated mean = 60±9 t d.m ha-1
20 < U  30   75%                       i.e. U=9/60x100 = 15%
U > 30       100%                      Discount = 25% x 9 = 2.25 t d.m ha-1
                                       Discounted conservative mean:
                                       In baseline = 60+2.25 = 62.25 t d.m ha-1
                                       In project = 60-2.25 = 57.75 t d.m ha-1

             28 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Appendix 3. Calculating correlation coefficient and slope of
                    regression

1. This appendix provides the formulae for calculation of the coefficient of correlation and
         the slope of regression line between two data sets. The formulae provided here can also
         be found in any textbook or reference book of statistics. It is only for convenience of the
         users and for avoiding any ambiguity in definition of these parameters that these
         formulae are provided here. These coefficients may also be calculated using commercial
         or open source computer software (e.g. statistical packages).

2. For two linearly related data sets of equal size, the correlation coefficient and the slope
         of regression line are calculated as follows:

                                                                                                              Equation (1)

       {( )( )}            Equation (2)
 ( )  ( )

Where:  = Slope of regression line of the dependent variable ( ) against the
            independent variable ( )
  ,
        = Sample correlation coefficient between the dependent variable ( )
            and the independent variable ( )

        = Sample standard deviation of the dependent variable ( ) values
            and the independent variable ( ) values respectively

        = Independent variable ( ) values
        = Mean of the independent variable ( ) values
        = Dependent variable ( ) values
        = Mean of the dependent variable ( ) values
        = Number of data values in each data set

                                   -----

                 29 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Version  Date               Document information

04.2     24 July 2015      Description
04.1     16 October 2013
04.0     4 October 2013    EB 85, Annex 22
                           Minor revision to correct paragraph 12, read "one or more of the
03.0.0   23 November 2012  following indicators apply" instead of "the following indicators
                           apply.

                           Editorial revision to correct paragraph and sub-heading numbers.

                           EB 75, Annex 26
                           This revision:
                            Options of using double sampling and simplified method of `no-

                                 decrease' were added;
                            Combining different methods in different strata was allowed;
                            A more comprehensive approach to uncertainty management

                                 was provided;
                            The structure was improved and some sections were moved to

                                 the appendices to improve readability;
                           Due to the overall modification of the document, no highlights of
                           the changes are provided.

                           EB 70, Annex 35
                           In this revision:
                            Step-wise guidance was provided which explains when to use

                                 which method of estimation;
                            Effect of the tree bark density was taken into account to

                                 estimate tree biomass;
                            A method for adjustment of the estimated mean values was

                                 provided when the uncertainty of estimation exceeds the
                                 allowable maximum uncertainty.
                           Due to the overall modification of the document, no highlights of the
                           changes are provided.

                           30 of 31
AR-TOOL14
Methodological tool: Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R
CDM project activities
Version 04.2

Version  Date               Description

02.1.0   15 April 2011      EB 60, Annex 13

                            In this amendment:

                             Equations for estimation of the means and variances of tree
                                  biomass at stratum level and at project level have been
                                  included;

                             Estimation of tree biomass is made on a per hectare basis, so
                                  that plotless sampling (point sampling) methods can be
                                  seamlessly applied;

                             An approach for estimation of change in biomass based on
                                  successive measurements of the same plots has been added;
                                  (iv) some entries in data and parameter tables have been
                                  updated to include more clear guidance in commonly
                                  encountered field situations;

                             Bark correction has been proposed in cases where a volume
                                  table based on under-bark volume is used in conjunction with
                                  biomass expansion factors based on over-bark volume (or vice
                                  versa).

02.0.0   17 September 2010  EB 56, Annex 13

                            In this revision:

                             The scope of the tool has been expanded so that it can be
                                 applied in both baseline scenario and project scenario;

                             The procedure for estimation of shrub biomass has been
                                 simplified by adopting a default estimation approach based on
                                 a fraction of forest biomass;

                             The mathematical notation and equations have been changed
                                 so to streamline these;

                             General layout and style of the document has been changed
                                 so as to make it in conformity with other documents such as
                                 the recently approved A/R methodologies; and

                             The title was changed to "Estimation of carbon stocks and
                                 change in carbon stocks of trees and shrubs in A/R CDM
                                 project activities" from the previous title "Estimation of changes
                                 in the carbon stocks of existing trees and shrubs within the
                                 boundary of an A/R CDM project activity".

                            Due to the overall modification of the document, no highlights of
                            the changes are provided.

01       25 March 2009      EB 46, Annex 18

                            Initial adoption.

Decision Class: Regulatory
Document Type: Tool
Business Function: Methodology
Keywords: afforestation reforestation, AR project activity, biomass, carbon pools

                                         31 of 31
