=== p1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
METHODOLOGICAL TOOL 
 
BM-T-AR-0004 
Estimation of carbon stocks and change in carbon 
stocks of trees and shru9bs in A/R ICM project 
activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publication Date: 27 March 2025  
Version 1.0 
  

=== p2
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  Page  
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 4 
2. Definitions and notation ............................................................................................................... 4 
3. Scope & Applicability.................................................................................................................... 5 
3.1. Scope .................................................................................................................................. 5 
3.2. Applicability ......................................................................................................................... 5 
3.3. Methodological Tool Approval Date .................................................................................... 5 
4. Methodology .................................................................................................................................. 5 
4.1. Conditions under which carbon stock and change in carbon stock may be estimated as 
zero  ............................................................................................................................................. 6 
4.2. Estimating change in carbon stock in trees between two points of time ............................ 7 
4.3 Difference of two independent stock estimations ............................................................... 7 
4.4     Direct estimation of change by re-measurement of sample plots ........................................ 8 
4.5      Estimation by proportionate crown cover ........................................................................... 10 
4.6 Demonstration of “no-decrease” ....................................................................................... 11 
4.7 Estimating change in carbon stock in trees in a year ....................................................... 12 
4.8 Estimating carbon stock in trees at a point of time ........................................................... 13 
4.9 Estimation by measurement of sample plots .................................................................... 13 
4.10 Stratified random sampling ............................................................................................... 13 
4.11 Double sampling ............................................................................................................... 15 
4.12 Estimating change in carbon stock in shrubs between two points of time ....................... 19 
4.13    Estimating change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year ..................................................... 20 
5.0 Estimating carbon stock in shrubs at a point of time ............................................................. 20 
6.0 Data and parameters used in the tool ....................................................................................... 21 
6.1 Data and parameters not monitored ................................................................................. 21 
6.2 Data and parameters monitored. ...................................................................................... 22 
Appendix 1. Methods of plot biomass measurement ....................................................................... 24 
Appendix 2. Applying uncertainty discount ....................................................................................... 29 
=== p3
 
Appendix 3. Calculating correlation coefficient and slope of .......................................................... 29 
 
  
   
=== p4
 
1. Introduction  
1. This tool provides step-by-step methods for estimation of carbon stock in living biomass 
of trees and shrubs. For ex-ante (projected) estimation of tree biomass it applies tree 
growth and stand development models. For ex-post (actual) estimation of tree biomass it 
uses data from measurements conducted in sample plots. Remote sensing data may also 
be used in conjunction with data from measurements conducted in sample plots. Biomass 
of shrubs is estimated from shrub crown cover. 
2. Definitions and notation  
2. The definitions contained in the Glossary of ICM terms shall apply.  
3. For the purpose of this tool, the following definitions apply:  
4. Uncertainty - is in the mean value of an estimated parameter equal to the estimated 
standard error of the mean expanded at 90 per cent confidence level divided by the mean 
value, expressed as percentage;   
Example: The mean value of above-ground tree biomass per hectare is estimated as 
45.328 t d.m. ha-1 from a sample of size 34. Sample standard deviation was 12.776 t d.m. 
ha-1. The estimated standard error of the mean (SEM) is 12.776/  = 2.191 t d.m. ha-1. 
The SEM expanded at 90 per cent confidence level is therefore = 2.191 x t(0.1,33) = 2.191 
x 1.692 = 3.707 t d.m. ha-1. This implies that the estimated mean has an uncertainty of 
(3.707/45.328) ×100 = 8.18 per cent.   
Note. In this tool only sampling uncertainty is assessed and controlled. Uncertainty in 
values obtained from direct measurement (e.g. measured diameter of a tree) or values 
derived from models (e.g. biomass of a tree derived from its diameter using an allometric 
equation) is not quantified.  
5. This type of uncertainty should be managed through application of appropriate quality 
assurance and quality control (QA/QC) methods, as explained in the parameter 
description tables in section 12.  
a) Species - can also refer to a species group when a species-specific biometric 
parameter (e.g. biomass expansion factor), or a model (e.g. allometric equation), is 
demonstrated to be applicable to more than one species;  
b) Tree biomass - refers to above-ground and below-ground living biomass of trees;  
c) Shrub biomass - refers to above-ground and below-ground living biomass of shrubs;  
d) Plot biomass - refers to tree biomass per hectare in a plot;  
e) Measurement of a sample plot - refers to the measurement of one or more 
dimensions (e.g. diameter) of the trees in a sample plot, or measurement of a plot 
parameter (e.g. basal area per hectare), and conversion of the measured tree 
dimensions, or the measured plot parameter into plot biomass by using one of the 
methods provided in Appendix 1;  

=== p5
 
f) Conservative value of a parameter - refers to the value which, when used in 
calculations, is more likely to result in underestimation rather than overestimation of 
the net anthropogenic GHG removals by sinks;  
6. For reasons of consistency and readability, this tool uses the following conventions    in 
naming of variables and parameters:  
a. Symbols for unit quantities (e.g. per hectare quantities) use lower case letters (e.g.   
bFOREST), whereas symbols for total quantities use uppercase letters (e.g. BTREE);  
b. Subscripts used for qualifying a variable or a parameter appear in upper case letters 
(e.g. CSHRUB_PROJECT), whereas subscripts used for denoting indices appear in lower 
case letters (e.g. CSHRUB_PROJECT,i).  
7. This tool uses the following units in their abbreviated form:  
a. Tonne dry matter is abbreviated as t d.m., and tonne dry matter per hectare is 
abbreviated as t d.m. ha-1;  
b. Tonne carbon dioxide equivalent is abbreviated as t CO 2e.  
3. Scope & Applicability 
3.1. Scope  
8. This tool can be used for estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in living 
biomass of trees and shrubs in an afforestation and reforestation (A/R) clean development 
mechanism (ICM) project activity. The tool is applicable for:  
(a) Estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in living biomass of trees 
and shrubs in baseline;  
(b) Ex-ante estimation (projection) of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in living 
biomass of trees and shrubs in project;  
(c) Ex-post estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in trees and shrubs 
for monitoring of project activities.  
3.2. Applicability  
9. This tool has no internal applicability conditions.  
3.3. Methodological Tool Approval Date 
10. The date of adoption of this document shall be effective from 27 March 2025. 
 
4. Methodology 
11. This tool provides procedures to determine the parameters listed in Table 1.  
=== p6
 
 Table 2.  Parameters determined by the tool  
Parameter  Unit  Description  
  t CO2e  Carbon stock in tree biomass within the project boundary at a 
given point of time in year t  
  t CO2e  Change in carbon stock in tree biomass within the project 
boundary in year t  
  t CO2e  Carbon stock in shrub biomass within the project boundary at 
a given point of time in year t  
  t CO2e  Change in carbon stock in shrub biomass within the project 
boundary in year t  
12. While applying this tool in an approved A/R ICM methodology, the following corresponding 
notations should be used:  
a. In the baseline scenario:  
  for   and   for     for   and 
 for   
b. In the project scenario:  
 for  and  for   
 for  and  for   
4.1. Conditions under which carbon stock and change in carbon stock may be 
estimated as zero  
13. Carbon stock in trees in the baseline can be accounted as zero if all of the following 
conditions are met:  
a. The pre-project trees are neither harvested, nor cleared, nor removed throughout the 
crediting period of the project activity;  
b. The pre-project trees do not suffer mortality because of competition from trees planted 
in the project, or damage because of implementation of the project activity, at any 
time during the crediting period of the project activity;  
c. The pre-project trees are not inventoried along with the project trees in monitoring of 
carbon stocks but their continued existence, consistent with the baseline scenario, is 
monitored throughout the crediting period of the project activity.  
14. Changes in carbon stocks in trees and shrubs in the baseline may be accounted as zero 
for those lands for which the project participants can demonstrate, through documentary 
evidence or through participatory rural appraisal (PRA), that one or more of the following 
indicators apply:  
a. Observed reduction in topsoil depth (e.g. as shown by root exposure, presence of 
pedestals, exposed sub-soil horizons);  

=== p7
 
b. Presence of gully, sheet or rill erosion; or landslides, or other forms of massmovement 
erosion;  
c. Presence of plant species locally known to be indicators of infertile land;  
d. Land comprises of bare sand dunes, or other bare lands;  
e. Land contains contaminated soils, mine spoils, or highly alkaline or saline soils;  
f. Land is subjected to periodic cycles (e.g. slash-and-burn, or clearing-regrowing 
cycles) so that the biomass oscillates between a minimum and a maximum value in 
the baseline;  
g. Conditions (a), (b) and (c) under paragraph 11 apply.  
15. For the purpose of ex-ante estimation of carbon stock and change in carbon stock in the 
project scenario, change in carbon stock of shrubs may be estimated as zero.  
4.2. Estimating change in carbon stock in trees between two points of time  
16. Change in carbon stock in trees between two points of time is estimated by using one of 
the following methods or a combination thereof:  
(a) Difference of two independent stock estimations;  
(b) Direct estimation of change by re-measurement of sample plots;  
(c) Estimation by proportionate crown cover;  
(d) Demonstration of “no-decrease”.  
4.3      Difference of two independent stock estimations  
17. Under this method, change in carbon stock in trees is estimated as the difference between 
two successive and independent carbon stock estimations.  
Note. This is method is efficient when the correlation between the plot biomass values on 
the two occasions is absent or weak (e.g. when there has been harvest or disturbance in 
a stratum after the first estimation, resulting in spatial re-distribution of tree biomass in the 
stratum).  
18. Under this method, the change in carbon stock in trees and the associated uncertainty are 
estimated as follows:  
   Equation (1)  
 
                                              Equation (2)  
  

=== p8
 
 
Where:  
  = Change in carbon stock in trees during the period between two 
points of time t1 and t2; t CO2e   
   = Carbon stock in trees as estimated at time t1; t CO2e  
Note 1. At the first verification is set equal to the carbon stock 
in the pre-project tree biomass ( ).  
However, this may be set equal to zero, if all of the conditions 
specified under paragraph 10 are met.  
Note 2. Even if  was made conservative at the time of 
previous verification, it is the estimated (undiscounted) value of 
 that is used here.  
   = Carbon stock in trees as estimated at time t2; t CO2e   
   =  Uncertainty in   
 ,   = Uncertainties in  and respectively  
19. Carbon stock in trees at a point of time is estimated by using one of the applicable methods 
provided in section 8.  
20. If   estimated from Equation (2) is greater than 10 per cent,   is made 
conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in 
Appendix 2.  
4.4     Direct estimation of change by re-measurement of sample plots  
21. This method is applicable only in ex-post estimation of change in carbon stock in trees for 
monitoring of project activities. Under this method, the same sample plots are measured 
on two successive occasions and the plot-level change in biomass is obtained by 
subtracting the plot biomass on the first occasion from the plot biomass on the second 
occasion.  
Note. This is method is efficient when there is a significant correlation between the plot 
biomass values on the two occasions (e.g. when there has been no harvest or disturbance 
in a stratum and therefore no significant spatial re-distribution of biomass has occurred in 
the stratum after the first estimation).  
22. Under this method, the change in carbon stock and the associated uncertainty are 
estimated as follows:  
  Equation (3)  

=== p9
 
  
                                                                              Equation (4) 
  
 
Where:  
   Change in carbon stock in trees between two successive 
measurements; t CO2e   
   Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t d.m.) -1  
A default value of 0.47 is used unless transparent and verifiable 
information can be provided to justify a different value.  
   Change in tree biomass within the biomass estimation strata; t d.m.   
A  Sum of areas of the biomass estimation strata; ha  
B   Mean change in tree biomass per hectare within the biomass 
estimation strata; t d.m. ha-1  
   Ratio of the area of stratum i to the sum of areas of biomass estimation 
strata (i.e. ); dimensionless  
  =  Mean change in carbon stock per hectare in tree biomass in stratum i; 
t d.m. ha-1   
 
 
   
Uncertainty in    
 
 
 Two-sided Student’s t-value for a confidence level of 90 per cent and 
degrees of freedom equal to n – M, where n is total number of sample 
plots within the tree biomass estimation strata, and M is the total 
number of tree biomass estimation strata   
   Variance of mean change in tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;(t 
d.m. ha-1)2   
   Number of sample plots, in stratum i, in which tree biomass was re-
measured  
23. Mean change in tree biomass per hectare in a stratum and the associated variance are 
estimated as follows:  
  Equation (7)  
                            
          
 
  

=== p10
 
                                         Equation (8)  
 
  where 
 
 
Mean change in tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
 
 
Change in tree biomass per hectare in plot p in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
   Variance of mean change in tree biomass per hectare in stratum i(t d.m. 
ha-1)2  
   Number of sample plots, in stratum i, in which tree biomass was re-
measured  
 
24. If   estimated from Equation (6) is greater than 10 per cent,   is made 
conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in 
Appendix 2.  
25. Tree biomass per hectare in a sample plot is estimated by applying one of the plot 
measurement methods provided in Appendix 1.  
4.5      Estimation by proportionate crown cover  
26. This method is applicable only in ex-ante estimation of change in carbon stock in trees in 
the baseline where the mean pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20 per cent of the 
threshold tree crown cover reported by India under paragraph 8 of the annex to decision 
5/CMP.1  
Example. India has reported a threshold tree crown cover of 30 per cent to define ‘forest’ 
for the purposes of the ICM. The method of estimation by proportionate crown cover is 
applicable only if the mean pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20 per cent of 30 per 
cent (i.e. less than 6 per cent).  
27. Under this method, the change in carbon stock in trees in the baseline is estimated as 
follows:  
 Equation (9)  
  
    Equation (10)  
 
 
 

=== p11
 
 Where:  
Symbol Description 
 
Mean annual change in carbon stock in trees in the baseline; t CO(_2) e 
yr(^{-1}) 
i Mean annual change in carbon stock in trees in the baseline, in baseline 
stratum (i); t CO(_2) e yr(^{-1}) 
 
Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t.d.m.)(^{-1}). A default value of 0.47 t 
C (t.d.m.)(^{-1}) is used unless transparent and verifiable information can 
be provided to justify a different value. 
 
Default mean annual increment of above-ground biomass in forest in the 
region or country where the A/R ICM project activity is located; t d.m. ha(^{-
1}) yr(^{-1}). Values of (\text{MAI}_{\text{FOR}}) are taken from Table 3A.1.5 
of the IPCC Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and 
Forestry ( latest version of IPCC GPG-LULUCF) unless transparent and 
verifiable information can be provided to justify different values.  
 
Root-shoot ratio for the trees in the baseline; dimensionless. A default value 
of 0.25 is used unless transparent and verifiable information can be 
provided to justify a different value. 
 
Crown cover of trees in the baseline, in baseline stratum (i), at the start of 
the A/R ICM project activity, expressed as a fraction (e.g. 10 per cent crown 
cover implies (CC_{\text{TREE,BL},i} = 0.10)); dimensionless  
 
Area of baseline stratum (i), delineated on the basis of tree crown cover at 
the start of the A/R ICM project activity; ha 
 
4.6       Demonstration of “no-decrease”  
28. This method is applicable only in ex-post estimation of change in carbon stock in trees for 
monitoring of project activities. Project participants may, at the time of a verification, 
demonstrate that tree biomass in one or more strata has not decreased relative to the tree 
biomass at the time of the previous verification, by proving that:  
a. No harvest has occurred in the stratum since the previous verification;  
b. The stratum was not affected by any disturbance (e.g. pest, fire) that would decrease 
the carbon stock in trees;  
c. Remote sensing data or inventory data, including participatory inventory or 
participatory photo-mapping data, demonstrate that tree crown cover in the stratum 
has not decreased since the previous verification.  

=== p12
 
29. Where all the three conditions above are demonstrated to have been met in a stratum, the 
change in carbon stock in trees in that stratum since the previous verification may be 
conservatively estimated as zero.  
Note. This method is efficient when project participants are required to submit a verification 
and certification report at a point of time when the biomass increase in the project since 
the previous verification may not be large enough to justify the cost of conducting an 
inventory (e.g. when periodic verification and certification is required to revalidate CCCs 
already issued and significant number of new CCCs is not expected).  
4.7      Estimating change in carbon stock in trees in a year  
30. Change in carbon stock in trees in a year (annual change) between two successive 
verifications is estimated on the assumption of linear change.  
31. Change in carbon stock in trees in a year is estimated as follows:  
                                                                                Equation (11) 
 
Where:  
 Change in carbon stock in trees within the project boundary in year t; t CO2e  
 
Carbon stock in trees within the project boundary at time t2; t CO2e.  
Note. Where estimation of carbon stock in tree biomass at time t2 is carried 
out by applying different methods in different strata,  is set equal to 
the sum of carbon stocks in all the strata in which the project area is divided.  
 
 
Carbon stock in trees within the project boundary at time t1;  t CO2e.  
Note. Where estimation of carbon stock in tree biomass at time t1 is carried 
out by applying different methods in different strata,  is set equal to 
the sum of carbon stocks in all the strata in which the project area is divided 
T 
Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 – t1); yr.  
Note 1. Value of T does not have to be a whole number (e.g. an interval of 4 
years and 5 months implies T = 4.417 yr).  
Note 2. Estimation of change in carbon stock in trees by proportionate crown 
cover ( see section 6.3) results in an annual change estimate and hence 
Equation (11) does not apply under this method.  
 

=== p13
 
4.8 Estimating carbon stock in trees at a point of time  
32. Carbon stock in trees at a point of time is estimated by using one of the following methods 
or a combination thereof:  
a. Estimation by measurement of sample plots;  
b. Estimation by modelling of tree growth and stand development;  
c. Estimation by proportionate crown cover;  
d. Updating the previous stock by independent measurement of change.  
33. When estimation is carried out by methods (a), (c) or (d) above, the date of last 
measurement of sample plot, or estimation of crown cover, is considered to be the date of 
estimation of carbon stock, even if the full process of measurement extends over a period 
of time.  
34. Where estimation of carbon stock in trees at a given point of time in year t is carried out 
by applying different methods in different strata, the value of  is set equal to the sum 
of carbon stocks in all the strata in which the project area was divided.  
4.9      Estimation by measurement of sample plots  
            Under this method, carbon stock in trees is estimated on the basis of measurements of 
sample plots. Sample plots are installed in one or more strata. Two sampling designs are 
available:  
(a)  Stratified random sampling;  
(b)  Double sampling.  
4.10 Stratified random sampling  
35. Under this method, random sample plots are installed in the strata (e.g. systematic 
sampling with a random start) and measured.  
Note. This method is more efficient when the sample plots are optimally allocated to the 
strata keeping in view the expected mean tree biomass per hectare and its variability in 
the strata. Number of sample plots and their allocation to strata may be estimated by using 
the A/R methodological tool “Calculation of the number of sample plots for measurements 
within A/R ICM project activities”.  
Example 1. At the time of verification, it is known that out of eight parcels of plantation land, 
three have been harvested in the last two years. Hence the mean tree biomass per hectare 
in these parcels is low and is relatively homogeneous. Hence these three parcels are 
treated as one stratum. Of the remaining five parcels, two parcels had poor tree growth 
compared to the other three. Thus these five parcels are treated as two separate strata.  
Example 2. In a forest plantation raised through assisted natural regeneration, the tree 
biomass is seen to be distributed unevenly throughout the project area. Using satellite 

=== p14
 
data it is seen that the distribution of the tree crown cover (which is expected to have a 
positive correlation with tree biomass) has clearly discernible patterns. Strata boundaries 
are therefore delineated on the basis tree crown cover estimated from the remote sensing 
data.  
36. Mean carbon stock in trees within the tree biomass estimation strata and the associated 
uncertainty are estimated as follows (all time-dependent quantities relate to the time of 
measurement):  
 
             
 Equation (12)  
  
   Equation (13)  
                                                                      Equation (14)  
                                                                      
 
 
                                                                     Equation (15)  
          where:  
 Carbon stock in trees in the tree biomass estimation strata; t CO 2e   
 
Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t d.m.) -1.  
A default value of 0.47 is used unless transparent and verifiable information 
can be provided to justify a different value.  
 
Tree biomass in the tree biomass   estimation strata; t d.m 
A Sum of areas of the tree biomass estimation strata; ha  
 
Mean tree biomass per hectare in the tree biomass estimation  strata; t 
d.m. ha-1  
 
 
Ratio of the area of stratum i to the sum of areas of tree biomass estimation 
strata (i.e. ); dimensionless  
 
 
Mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
uc Uncertainty in   
Tval Two-sided Student’s t-value for a confidence level of 90 per cent and 
degrees of freedom equal to n – M, where n is total number of sample 

=== p15
 
plots within the tree biomass estimation strata and M is the total number 
of tree biomass estimation strata   
 
 
Variance of tree biomass per hectare across all sample plots in  
stratum i; (t d.m. ha-1)2  
 Number of sample plots in stratum i.  
 
37. Mean tree biomass per hectare in a stratum and the associated variance are estimated 
as follows:  
  Equation (16)  
  
                                                 Equation (17)  
  
           where 
 
BTREE,i 
Mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
 
 
BTREE,p Tree biomass per hectare in plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
 Variance of mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;  
(t d.m. ha-1)2  
 Number of sample plots in stratum i.  
 
38. If  estimated from Equation (15) is greater than 10 per cent,  is made conservative 
by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in Appendix 2.  
39. Tree biomass per hectare in a plot is estimated by using one of the plot measurement 
methods provided in Appendix 1.  
4.11 Double sampling  
40. Under this method, a secondary variable is measured in all the sample plots in a stratum 
and tree biomass is measured in a sub-set of the same sample plots. The mean biomass 
and its variance are estimated from the measured plot biomass values in the sub-sample 
and are adjusted through regression of the plot biomass values against the observed plot 
values of the secondary variable in the sub-sample.  
41. This method is applicable only if there is a linear relationship between the plot biomass 
values and the plot values of the secondary variable (i.e. the best-fit curve is a straight 
line) within the range of the values.  

=== p16
 
42. Note. This method is efficient when spatial distribution of tree biomass in the area is highly 
heterogeneous and does not show ‘block patterns’ at significant scale and thus does not 
allow delineation of strata. The method is more efficient when the cost of obtaining the 
values of the secondary variable is low compared to cost of measurement of plot biomass, 
and the correlation between the secondary variable and the measured plot biomass values 
is high.  
43. Example 1. Spatial distribution of tree biomass in a stratum was highly heterogeneous and 
it was not efficient to delineate tree biomass sub-strata. The project participants measured 
basal area in 300 sample plots. In a sub-sample of 50 plots they also measured plot 
biomass. This double sampling design reduced the variance of the estimated mean by 
one half. To achieve the same precision without double sampling it would have been 
necessary to conduct plot biomass measurement in 200 plots which would have been 
costlier.  
44. Example 2. In a large project area the spatial distribution of tree biomass was highly 
heterogeneous and it was not efficient to delineate tree biomass strata. However, remotely 
sensed satellite data covering the area was available at a very low cost. An index, namely, 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), was constructed from this data which was 
found to have approximately linear relationship with the per-hectare tree biomass. A 
double sampling design was adopted with construction of NDVI in 2000 sample plots and 
measurement of diameter of all trees in 150 sample plots selected from the 2000 plots 
using systematic selection with a random start. This double sampling design reduced the 
variance of the estimated mean by one third. To achieve the same precision by measuring 
fixed-area plots alone would have required measurement of 300 fix-area sample plots 
which would have been costlier.  
45. Equations (12) to (15) also apply in this method for aggregating the mean and its variance 
over the strata. However, for each stratum in which double sampling is applied, the 
following equations apply instead of Equations (16) and (17):  
                                Equation (18)  
            
              Equation (19)  
  
           where 
 
BTREE,i 
Mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
 
 
BTREE,p Tree biomass per hectare in plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
 Number of sample plots in the sub-sample  
 Tree biomass per hectare in plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  

=== p17
 
 
Mean value of the secondary variable across all the sample plots  
 Mean value of the secondary variable across the sub-sample of sample 
plots in which tree biomass is also measured  
 
 Variance of mean tree biomass per hectare in stratum i;  
 
Ratio of number of sample plots in the sub-sample to the number of sample 
plots in the sample (  <1)  
 
Coefficient of correlation between the secondary variable and the tree 
biomass per hectare in a sample plot, estimated across all the sample plots 
in the sub-sample   
 
46. The slope of the regression   and the coefficient of correlation   are calculated as 
explained in Appendix 3.  
47. Tree biomass per hectare in a sample plot is estimated by using one of the plot 
measurement methods provided in Appendix 1.  
48. If  estimated from Equation (15) is greater than 10 per cent,  is made conservative 
by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in Appendix 2.  
49. Estimation by modelling of tree growth and stand development  
50. This method is used for ex-ante estimation (projection) of carbon stock in tree biomass. 
Under this method existing data are used in combination with tree growth models to predict 
the growth of trees and the development of the tree stand over time.  
51. Stand parameters such as stocking (e.g. number of stems per hectare or basal area per 
hectare), age-class structure, and species composition at different points of time are 
simulated from assumed (planned) tree planting and management practices (e.g. planting 
density, survival rate, thinning and pruning operations and their timing).  
52. Tree growth (e.g. diameter or height increment) is simulated by taking into account local 
tree-growth data from past experience (e.g. age-diameter curves, yield tables, yield 
curves) while also considering relevant site factors (e.g. soil, terrain, slope, aspect, 
precipitation) and stand parameters.  
53. Ex-ante estimation (projection) of carbon stock in tree biomass is not subjected to 
uncertainty control, although the project participants should use the best available data 
and models that apply to the project site and the tree species.  
54. Estimation by proportionate crown cover  
55. This method is applicable only for estimation of the pre-project carbon stock in tree 
biomass in the baseline where the mean pre-project tree crown cover is less than 20 per 
cent of the threshold tree crown cover reported by India under paragraph 8 of the annex 
to decision 5/CMP.1.  

=== p18
 
56. Example. India has reported a threshold tree crown cover of 30 per cent for defining ‘forest’ 
for the purposes of the ICM. This method is applicable only if the mean pre-project tree 
crown cover is less than 20 per cent of 30 per cent (i.e. less than 6 per cent).  
57. Carbon stock in trees is estimated on the basis of tree crown cover at the time of the start 
of the project (the pre-project tree crown cover). The area within the project boundary is 
stratified by pre-project tree crown cover.  
58. Under this method, carbon stock in tree biomass is estimated as follows: 
                  M  
                                                                                                                          Equation (20)  
  
  
               Equation (21)  
            where  
 Carbon stock in pre-project tree biomass; t CO 2e   
Carbon stock in pre-project tree biomass in stratum i; t CO2e      
Carbon fraction of tree biomass; t C (t.d.m.) -1.  
A default value of 0.47 t C (t.d.m.)-1 is used 
 
Mean above-ground biomass in forest in the region or country  
where the A/R ICM project is located; t d.m. ha-1  
 
 
Values from latest version of the IPCC GPG-LULUCF are used unless 
transparent and verifiable information can be provided to justify different 
values.  
 Root-shoot ratio for trees in the baseline; dimensionless.  
A default value of 0.25 is used unless transparent and verifiable 
information can be provided to justify a different value.  
 
Crown cover of trees in baseline stratum i, at the start of the A/R ICM 
project activity, expressed as a fraction (e.g. 10 per cent crown cover 
implies  = 0.10); dimensionless  
 
Area of baseline stratum i, delineated on the basis of tree crown cover at 
the start of the A/R ICM project activity; ha  
 
59. Under this method, the new carbon stock in trees is obtained by adding the change in 
carbon stock in trees estimated by re-measurement of plots (see section 6.2) to the carbon 
stock estimated at the previous verification.  
Note. This method is efficient when the number of CCCs is to be estimated and the method 
of direct estimation of change in carbon stock by re-measurement of sample plots is 
efficient. Since tCCCs are based on total carbon stock, the carbon stock estimated at the 
previous verification must be updated by adding the change in carbon stock to arrive at 
the carbon stock at the second verification.  

=== p19
 
60. Under this method, carbon stock in trees in a stratum and the associated uncertainty are 
estimated as follows:  
 
    Equation (22)  
                                             Equation (23)  
  
 
           where:  
    Carbon stock in trees at time t2; t CO2e  
  Carbon stock in trees as estimated at time t1; t CO2e . 
Note. Even if  was made conservative at the 
time of the previous verification, it is the estimated 
(undiscounted) value of  that is used here.  
    Change in carbon stock in trees during the period 
between times t1 and t2; t CO2e   
uC  Uncertainty in   
,    Uncertainties in  and  respectively  
 
61.  If   estimated from Equation (23) is greater than 10 per cent,   is made 
conservative by applying uncertainty discount according to the procedure provided in 
Appendix 2.  
4.12 Estimating change in carbon stock in shrubs between two points of time  
62. Change in carbon stock in shrubs between two points of time is estimated as follows:  
   Equation (24)  
Where:  
  = Change in carbon stock in shrub biomass during the period 
between times t1 and t2; t CO2-e   
   = Carbon stock in shrub biomass at time t2; t CO2-e  
   = Carbon stock in shrub biomass at time t1; t CO2-e  

=== p20
 
63. Carbon stock in shrub biomass at a point of time is estimated by using the method 
provided in section 10.  
64. Where, by applying mutatis mutandis the “no decrease” method provided under section 
6.4 to shrubs, it can be shown that there has been no decrease in carbon stock in shrubs 
in one or more strata since the previous verification, the value of  for those strata 
can be estimated as zero.  
4.13    Estimating change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year  
65. Change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year (annual change) between two successive 
verifications is estimated on the assumption of linear change.  
66. Change in carbon stock in shrubs in a year is estimated as follows:  
                                                                                 Equation (25)  
  
Where:  
  = Change in carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary in 
year t between times t1 and t2; t CO2-e   
  = Carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary at time t2; t 
CO2e  
  = Carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary at time t1; t 
CO2e  
 T  = Time elapsed between two successive estimations (T=t2 – t1); yr  
Note. Value of T does not have to be a whole number (e.g. an interval 
of 4 years and 5 months implies T = 4.417 yr).  
5.0       Estimating carbon stock in shrubs at a point of time  
67. Carbon stock in shrubs at a point of time is estimated on the basis of shrub crown cover. 
The area within the project boundary is stratified by shrub crown cover. Those areas where 
the shrub crown cover is less than 5 per cent are treated as a single stratum and the shrub 
biomass in this stratum is estimated as zero.  
68. For the strata with a shrub crown cover of greater than 5 per cent, carbon stock in shrubs 
is estimated as follows:  
Equation (26)  
  
        Equation (27)  
           where:  

=== p21
 
 
Carbon stock in shrubs within the project boundary at a given point of time 
in year t; t CO2-e  
 
Carbon fraction of shrub biomass; t C (t.d.m.)-1.  
A default value of 0.47 is used unless transparent and verifiable information 
can be provided to justify a different value.  
 
Root-shoot ratio for shrubs; dimensionless.  
The default value of 0.40 is used unless transparent and verifiable 
information can be provided to justify a different value  
 Area of shrub biomass estimation stratum i; ha  
 
Shrub biomass per hectare in shrub biomass estimation stratum i; t    d.m. 
ha-1  
 
Ratio of shrub biomass per hectare in land having a shrub crown cover 
of1.0 (i.e. 100 per cent) and the default above-ground biomass content per 
hectare in forest in the region/country where the A/R ICM project activity is 
located; dimensionless.  
A default value of 0.10 should be used unless transparent and verifiable 
information can be provided to justify a different value.  
 
Default above-ground biomass content in forest in the region/country 
where the A/R ICM project activity is located; t d.m. ha -1.  
Values from the latest version of the IPCC GPG-LULUCF are used unless 
transparent and verifiable information can be provided to justify different 
values.  
 
Crown cover of shrubs in shrub biomass estimation stratum i at the time of 
estimation, expressed as a fraction (e.g. 10 per cent crown cover implies 
 = 0.10); dimensionless  
 
6.0       Data and parameters used in the tool  
69. This section describes the requirements for the data and parameters used in this tool. The 
requirements contained in the following data description tables should be treated as an 
integral part of the tool.  
6.1     Data and parameters not monitored  
70. The values, sources, and requirements for data and parameters which are not subject to 
monitoring are provided in the text of the tool along with the equations in which these are 
used.  

=== p22
 
6.2    Data and parameters monitored.  
71. The requirements for data and parameters subject to monitoring are provided in the tables 
below.  
 Data / Parameter table 1.  Area of land  
Data / Parameter:  ,  ,     
Data unit:  Ha  
Description:  Area of a sample plot; area of a stratum  
Source of data:  Field measurement  
Measurement 
procedures (if any):  
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) prescribed under national 
forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these, SOPs from 
published handbooks, or from the latest version of IPCC GPG-
LULUCF, are applied  
Monitoring frequency:  At every verification  
QA/QC procedures:  Quality control/quality assurance (QA/QC) procedures prescribed 
under national forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these,  
QA/QC procedures from published handbooks, or from the latest 
version of IPCC GPG-LULUCF, are applied  
            Data / Parameter table 2.  Shrub crown cover  
Data / Parameter:    
Data unit:  Dimensionless  
Description:  Crown cover of shrubs in shrub biomass stratum i   
Source of data:  Field measurement  
Measurement 
procedures (if any):  
Considering that the biomass in shrubs is smaller than the biomass in 
trees, a simplified method of measurement may be used for 
estimating shrub crown cover. Ocular estimation of crown cover may 
be carried out or any other method such as the line transect method 
or the relascope method may be applied  
Monitoring frequency:  At every verification  
QA/QC procedures:  Quality control/quality assurance (QA/QC) procedures prescribed 
under national forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these,  
QA/QC procedures from published handbooks, or from the latest 
version of IPCC GPG-LULUCF, are applied  

=== p23
 
Comment:  When land is subjected to periodic cycles (e.g. slash-and-burn, or 
clearing-regrowing cycles) so that the shrub crown cover oscillates 
between a minimum and maximum values in the baseline, an average 
shrub crown cover equal to 0.5 is used unless transparent and 
verifiable information can be provided to justify a different value   
 Data / Parameter table 3.  Tree crown cover  
Data / Parameter:    
Data unit:  Dimensionless  
Description:  Crown cover of trees in the baseline stratum i  
Source of data:  Field measurement   
Measurement 
procedures (if any):  
Considering that the biomass in trees in the baseline is smaller 
compared to the biomass in trees in the project, a simplified method 
of measurement may be used for estimating tree crown cover. Ocular 
estimation of tree crown cover may be carried out or any other 
method such as the line transect method or the relascope method 
may be applied  
Monitoring frequency:  Measured only once (at the beginning of the project)  
QA/QC procedures:  Quality control/quality assurance (QA/QC) procedures prescribed 
under national forest inventory are applied. In the absence of these,  
QA/QC procedures from published handbooks, or from the latest 
version of IPCC GPG-LULUCF, are applied  
Comment:  When land is subjected to periodic cycles (e.g. slash-and-burn, or 
clearing-regrowing cycles) so that the tree crown cover oscillates 
between a minimum and maximum values in the baseline, the value 
of this parameter should be set equal to half the maximum tree crown 
cover that would be achieved under the cycle  
  

=== p24
 
  
Appendix 1. Methods of plot biomass measurement  
 
1. This appendix provides methods for measurement of tree biomass per hectare in a sample plot 
(the plot biomass value). Plot biomass values are estimated from direct or indirect 
measurements conducted on trees in the sample plot. Table 1 presents the type of 
measurements and the methods for converting these measurements into tree biomass.  
 Table 1.  Plot measurements and their conversion to tree biomass  
Step  Fixed area plots  Variable area plots  
Step 1. Measurement 
(what is measured)  
Individual tree dimension (e.g.  
diameter at breast height, 
diameter at root collar, tree height)  
Basal area per hectare  
Step 2. Conversion  
(how measurements  
are converted into tree 
biomass)  
1. Using allometric equations 
based on tree dimensions; or  
2. Using biomass expansion  
factors; or  
3. Combination of 1 and 2  
1. Using allometric equations 
based on basal area; or  
2. Using biomass expansion  
factors; or  
3. Combination of 1 and 2  
Note. Sampling by variable area plot method is also termed as ‘angle count sampling’ in forest 
inventory literature.  
1. Measurement of fixed area plots  
2. In this method, sample plots of the same size (e.g.  of a hectare) are installed in a 
stratum. All trees in a sample plot above a minimum dimension are measured and the 
biomass of each tree is estimated. The minimum dimension selected can be low (e.g. a 
diameter of 2 cm) or high (e.g. a diameter of 10 cm) depending upon the applicability of 
models (e.g. allometric equations or volume equations) to be used for conversion of the 
tree dimension into tree volume or tree biomass, and upon cost-effectiveness of 
measurement.  
3. The biomass of the individual trees is added and the sum is divided by the area of the 
sample plot to obtain the plot biomass value.  

=== p25
 
  
Note. Where the number of saplings with diameter below the range of diameter applicable 
to the allometric equation is high, the mean biomass of the saplings in a sample plot can 
be estimated as follows: (1) Determine the diameter mid-way between the diameter of the 
smallest sapling existing and the smallest diameter allowed by the allometric equation. (2) 
Harvest from outside the plot area a few saplings having diameter close to the mid-way 
diameter and obtain the mean biomass per sapling; (3) Count all the saplings in the sample 
plot and multiply this number by the mean sapling biomass to obtain their contribution to 
the plot biomass.  
4. The plot biomass value (i.e. per-hectare tree biomass at the centre of the plot) is estimated 
as follows (all time-dependent variables relate to the time of measurement):  
  Equation (1)  
  
Equation (2)  
  
Equation (3)  
  
Where:  
  =  Tree biomass per hectare in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
 =  Tree biomass in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m.  
   =  Size of sample plot in stratum i; ha  
  =  Biomass of trees of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m. 
  =  Biomass of tree l of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m.  
5. Biomass of a tree in a sample plot is estimated by using one of the following equations:  
   Equation (4)  
   Equation (5)  
Where:  

=== p26
 
  
  = Biomass of tree l of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t 
d.m.  
  = Above-ground biomass of the tree returned by the 
allometric equation for species j relating the measurements 
of tree l to the above-ground biomass of the tree; t d.m.  
Note. The allometric equation used may be based on 
different units of inputs and outputs. For example, input 
values of diameter at breast height (dbh) may be in inches 
and output of biomass may be in pounds, rather than dbh in 
cm and biomass in kg or t d.m. In such a case, the function 
should be applied consistently (e.g. convert the dbh values 
from centimetre to inch units, obtain the tree biomass in 
pound, and then convert the biomass into metric tonne).  
  
   = Root-shoot ratio for tree species j; dimensionless  
The value of  is estimated as   
where  is the above-ground tree biomass per hectare (in t 
d.m. ha-1), unless transparent and verifiable information can 
be provided to justify a different value.  
Note. If trees have grown as coppice regeneration after a 
harvest, then the value of should be multiplied by a factor 
equal to  or 1, whichever is greater, where 
 is the volume per hectare of trees harvested and 
 is the volume per hectare of trees standing in the plot 
at the time of measurement.  
 = Stem volume of tree l of species j in sample plot p of stratum i, 
estimated from the tree dimension(s) as entry data into a 
volume table or volume equation; m3  
Note. Where the volume table or volume equation predicts 
under-bark volume (i.e. wood volume, rather than gross 
stem volume), suitable correction should be applied to 
estimate the over-bark volume.   

=== p27
 
  
   = Density (over-bark) of tree species j; t d.m. m-3  
Values are taken from the latest version of the IPCC GPG 
LULUCF unless transparent and verifiable information can 
be provided to justify different values.  
Note. Where density (specific gravity) of the bark of a tree 
species is different from the density of the wood, suitable 
correction should be applied to estimate a conservative 
value of the overall (over-bark) density of tree stem.  
   = Biomass expansion factor for conversion of tree stem  
biomass to above-ground tree biomass, for tree species j; dimensionless  
For ex-ante estimation, the value of  is selected by 
applying, mutatis mutandis, the procedure described in 
paragraph 7 below.  
For ex-post estimation the conservative default value of 1.15 
is used, unless transparent and verifiable information can be 
provided to justify a different value.  
6. For ex-ante estimation the allometric equation, or volume table or volume equation applied 
to a tree species is selected from the following sources (the most preferred source being 
listed first):  
(a) Existing data applicable to local situation (e.g. represented by similar ecological 
conditions);  
(b) National data (e.g. from national forest inventory or national greenhouse gas 
(GHG) inventory);  
(c) Data from neighbouring countries with similar conditions; (d)  Globally 
applicable data.  
7. For ex-post estimation, the allometric equation used must be demonstrated to be 
appropriate for the purpose of estimation of tree biomass by applying the tool 
“Demonstrating appropriateness of allometric equations for estimation of aboveground 
tree biomass in A/R ICM project activities”, and the volume table or volume equation used 
must be demonstrated to be appropriate for the purpose of estimation of tree biomass by 
applying the tool “Demonstrating appropriateness of volume equations for estimation of 
aboveground tree biomass in A/R ICM project activities”.  

=== p28
 
  
2.  Measurement of variable plots  
8. This method estimates tree biomass per hectare from the basal area per hectare and 
therefore does not require individual tree measurements. Tree basal area is obtained at 
the centre of a sample plot using an angle-count instrument (e.g. a wedge prism or a 
relascope).  
9. Tree biomass in a plot is estimated as follows:  
Equation (6)  
  
Where:  
   = Tree biomass per hectare in sample plot p of stratum i;  
t d.m. ha-1  
 = Tree biomass per hectare of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; t d.m. ha-1  
10. Tree biomass per hectare of a species in a sample plot is estimated by using one of the 
following equations:  
   Equation (7)  
   Equation (8)  
Where:  
  = Tree biomass per hectare of species j in sample plot p of stratum i; 
t d.m. ha-1  
  = Above-ground tree biomass per hectare in plot p returned by the 
allometric equation for species j relating the basal area of the plot to 
the above-ground tree biomass per hectare; t d.m. ha-1  
  = Stem volume per hectare of trees of species j in sample plot p of 
stratum i estimated by using the basal area of the plot as entry data 
into a volume table or volume equation; m3 ha-1  
11. All other symbols have the same meanings and requirements as in Equations (4) and  
(5).  

=== p29
 
  
12. Requirements under paragraphs 7 and 8 above also apply, mutatis mutandis, in respect 
of allometric equations and volume functions used under this method.  
  
    
Appendix 2. Applying uncertainty discount  
 
1. Estimates with high uncertainty can be used in methodologies only if such estimates are 
conservative. This appendix provides a procedure for applying discount factors in order to 
make the mean estimated values of parameters conservative.  
2. When the uncertainty in the estimated mean value of a parameter is more than 10 per 
cent, the estimated mean value is either increased or decreased by a percentage of the 
uncertainty. Table 1 provides the uncertainty discount factors to be applied for different 
ranges of uncertainty.  
 Table 1.  Uncertainty discount factors    
Uncertainty  Discount (% of U)  How applied  
U ≤ 10%  0%   Example:  
Estimated mean = 60±9 t d.m ha-1 i.e. 
U=9/60x100 = 15%  
Discount = 25% x 9 = 2.25 t d.m ha -1 
Discounted conservative mean:  
In baseline = 60+2.25 = 62.25 t d.m ha -1  
In project = 60-2.25 = 57.75 t d.m ha -1  
10 < U ≤ 15  25%  
15 < U ≤ 20  50%  
20 < U ≤ 30  75%  
U > 30  100%  
  
Appendix 3. Calculating correlation coefficient and slope of  
regression  
1. This appendix provides the formulae for calculation of the coefficient of correlation and the 
slope of regression line between two data sets. The formulae provided here can also be 
=== p30
 
  
found in any textbook or reference book of statistics. It is only for convenience of the users 
and for avoiding any ambiguity in definition of these parameters that these formulae are 
provided here. These coefficients may also be calculated using commercial or open source 
computer software (e.g. statistical packages).  
2. For two linearly related data sets of equal size, the correlation coefficient and the slope of 
regression line are calculated as follows:  
   Equation (1)  
  Equation (2)  
  
Where:  
  = Slope of regression line of the dependent variable ( ) against the 
independent variable ( )  
  = Sample correlation coefficient between the dependent variable ( ) 
and the independent variable ( )  
,   = Sample standard deviation of the dependent variable ( ) values 
and the independent variable ( ) values respectively  
   = Independent variable ( ) values  
   
  

=== p31
 
  
Revision/Changes in the Document 
 
 
Version Date Description 
 
1.0 March 2025 Initial Adoption 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   