=== p1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
METHODOLOGICAL TOOL 
 
BM-T-003  
Baseline, project and/or leakage emissions from 
electricity consumption and monitoring of electricity 
generation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publication Date: 27 March 2025 
Version 1.0 
 
 
  

=== p2
2 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 3 
2. SCOPE & APPLICABILITY ....................................................................................... 3 
2.1. Scope ............................................................................................................. 3 
2.2. Applicability .................................................................................................... 3 
3. PARAMETERS .......................................................................................................... 4 
4. METHODOLOGY: PROCEDURE ............................................................................. 4 
4.1. Emission from electricity generation .............................................................. 4 
4.2. Emissions from electricity consumption ......................................................... 4 
4.3. Data and parameters not monitored .............................................................. 11 
4.4. Monitoring Methodology Procedure ............................................................... 11 
 
 
  
=== p3
3 
 
1. Introduction 
1. The methodological tool is developed to provide consistent procedures among the ICM 
methodologies to calculate baseline, project and/or leakage emissions due to electricity 
consumption and to monitor the amount of electricity generated by the project power plant. 
2. Scope & Applicability 
2.1. Scope  
2. This tool provides procedures to estimate the baseline, project and/or leakage emissions 
associated with the consumption of electricity, and procedures to monitor the amount of 
electricity generated by the project power plant. 
3. The tool provides options to non-obligated entities to estimate the baseline, project and/or 
leakage emissions associated with the consumption of electricity by the proposed project 
activity. These options aim to provide flexibility while ensuring that the estimation of 
emission reductions is conservative.  Some options provide broader estimates of the 
emission reductions and rely on conservative default values or conservative 
simplifications, whereas other options provide more accurate estimates but require  
extensive data monitoring. 
4. Depending on their specific scope, methodologies which refer to this tool should: 
(a) Specify clearly which sources of project, baseline and leakage electricity consumption 
should be calculated with this tool; and/or 
(b) Provide the procedures to determine the most likely baseline scenario for each source 
of baseline electricity consumption; and/or 
(c) Provide the procedures to determine the most likely baseline scenario for electricity 
generated and supplied by the project power plant to the grid or consumers; and 
(d) Provide the procedures to determine the baseline CO 2 emission factors for the 
electricity generated and supplied by the project power plant (EF BL,grid,CO2,y and 
EFBL,facility,CO2,i,y). 
2.2. Applicability 
5. If emissions are calculated for electricity consumption, the tool is only applicable if one out 
of the following three scenarios applies to the sources of electricity consumption:  
(a) Scenario A: Electricity consumption from the grid. The electricity is purchased from the 
grid only, and either no captive power plant(s) is/are installed at the site of electricity 
consumption or, if any captive power plant exists on site, it is either  not operating or it is 
not physically able to provide electricity to the electricity consumer;  
(b) Scenario B: Electricity consumption from (an) off -grid fossil fuel fired captive power 
plant(s). One or more fossil fuel fired captive power plants are installed at the site of the 
electricity consumer and supply the consumer with electricity. The captive power plant(s) 
is/are not connected to the electricity grid; or  
(c) Scenario C: Electricity consumption from the grid and (a) fossil fuel fired captive power 
plant(s). One or more fossil fuel fired captive power plants operate at the site of the 
electricity consumer. The captive power plant(s) can provide electricity t o the electricity 
consumer. The captive power plant(s) is/are also connected to the electricity grid. Hence, 
=== p4
4 
 
the electricity consumer can be provided with electricity from the captive power plant(s) 
and the grid. 
6. This tool can be referred to in methodologies to provide procedures to monitor amount of 
electricity generated in the project scenario, only if one out of the following three project 
scenarios applies to the recipient of the electricity generated: 
(a) Scenario I: Electricity is supplied to the grid; 
(b) Scenario II: Electricity is supplied to consumers/electricity consuming facilities; or 
(c) Scenario III: Electricity is supplied to the grid and consumers/electricity consuming 
facilities. 
7. This tool is not applicable in cases where captive renewable power generation 
technologies are installed to provide electricity in the project activity, in the baseline 
scenario or to sources of leakage. The tool only accounts for CO2 emissions. 
3. Parameters 
8. This tool provides procedures to determine the following parameters:  
Table 1. Parameters 
Parameter  SI Unit  Description  
PEEC,y  t CO2 / yr  Project emissions from electricity consumption in year 
y  
BEEC,y  t CO2 / yr  Baseline emissions from electricity consumption in 
year y  
LEEC,y  t CO2 / yr  Leakage emissions from electricity consumption in 
year y  
EGPJ,grid,y  MWh/ yr  Quantity of electricity generated and supplied by the 
project power plant to the grid in year y  
 
4. Methodology: Procedure  
4.1. Emission from electricity generation 
9. The baseline emissions from electricity generated and supplied by the project power plant 
to the grid and/or to the consumers (BEEG,y) is calculated in the methodology that refers to 
this tool. This tool aims to provide consistent monitoring provisions to determine the 
quantity of electricity generated and supplied to the grid and/or consumers/electricity 
consuming facility (e.g. quantity of electricity generated and supplied by the project power 
plant to the grid in year y (EGPJ,grid,y) or to the consumers/electricity consuming facility i in 
year y (EGPJ,facility,i,y). 
4.2. Emissions from electricity consumption 
10. Emissions from electricity consumption include CO 2 emissions from the combustion of 
fossil fuels at any power plants at the site(s) of electricity consumption and, if applicable,  
at power plants connected physically to the electricity system (grid) from which electricity 
is consumed. 
=== p5
5 
 
11. Non-Obligated Entity should document transparently in the  ICM-PDD and in monitoring  
reports which sources of electricity consumption are calculated with this tool and, for each 
source, which scenario (A, B or C, as described in Section 2.2, paragraph 5 above) 
applies. 
12. In the following, a generic approach to calculate emissions from consumption of electricity 
is introduced. This approach can be used in all applicable scenarios (A, B or C) as 
described in Section 2.2, paragraph 6. Then guidance on the determination of the emission 
factor for electricity generation is provided. Finally, simplified alternative approaches 
applicable to scenario B and to project and leakage are introduced in Section 4.2.2, 
paragraph 31. 
4.2.1. Generic approach 
13. In the generic approach, project, baseline and/or leakage emissions from consumption of 
electricity are calculated based on the quantity of electricity consumed, an emission factor 
for electricity generation and a factor to account for transmission losses, as follows: 
 
𝑃𝐸𝐸𝐶,𝑦 = Σ𝐸𝐶𝑃𝐽,𝑗,𝑦×𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐹,𝑗,𝑦×(1+𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑗,𝑦)𝑗                                                                Equation (1) 
𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐶,𝑦 = Σ𝐸𝐶𝐵𝐿,𝑘,𝑦×𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐹,𝑘,𝑦×(1+𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑘,𝑦)𝑘                                                              Equation (2) 
𝐿𝐸𝐸𝐶,𝑦 = Σ𝐸𝐶𝐿𝐸,𝑙,𝑦×𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐹,𝑙,𝑦×(1+𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑙,𝑦)𝑙                                                                 Equation (3)  
 
Where: 
𝑃𝐸𝐸𝐶,𝑦= Project emissions from electricity consumption in year y (tCO2 / yr) 
𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐶,𝑦= Baseline emissions from electricity consumption in year y (tCO2 / yr) 
𝐿𝐸𝐸𝐶,𝑦= Leakage emissions from electricity consumption in year y (tCO2 / yr) 
𝐸𝐶𝑃𝐽,𝑗,𝑦= Quantity of electricity consumed by the project electricity consumption source j in 
year y (MWh/yr) 
𝐸𝐶𝐵𝐿,𝑘,𝑦 = Quantity of electricity that would be consumed by the baseline electricity 
consumer k in year y (MWh/yr) 
𝐸𝐶𝐿𝐸,𝑙,𝑦 = Net increase in electricity consumption of source l in year y as a result of 
leakage1 (MWh/yr) 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐹,𝑗,𝑦 = Emission factor for electricity generation for source j in year y (t CO2/MWh) 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐹,𝑘,𝑦 =Emission factor for electricity generation for source k in year y (t CO2/MWh) 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐹,𝑙,𝑦 =Emission factor for electricity generation for source l in year y (t CO2/MWh) 
𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑗,𝑦=Average technical transmission and distribution losses for providing electricity to 
source j in year y 
𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑘,𝑦=Average technical transmission and distribution losses for providing electricity to 
source k in year y 
𝑇𝐷𝐿𝑙,𝑦=Average technical transmission and distribution losses for providing electricity to 
source l in year y 
j=Sources of electricity consumption in the project 
k=Sources of electricity consumption in the baseline 
l=Leakage sources of electricity consumption      
 
1 A net increase of electricity consumption outside the project boundary as a result of the ICM project activity 
should be reflected in a positive value for EC LE,l,y. If electricity consumption decreases as a result of the  
ICM project activity, ECLE,l,y should be assumed as zero. 
=== p6
6 
 
 
4.2.1.1. Determination of the emission factor for electricity generation (EFEL,j/k/l,y) 
 
14. The determination of the emission factors for electricity generation (EFEL,j/k/l,y) in the project 
scenario depends on which scenario (A, B or C), as described in Section 3.2, paragraph 
6 that applies to the source of electricity consumption that would be displaced in the 
baseline by electricity generated in the project: 
 
4.2.1.1.1. Scenario A: Electricity consumption from the grid 
 
15. Calculate the combined margin emission factor of the applicable electricity system, using 
the procedures in the latest version of the CO2 Baseline Database published by the CEA 
(EFEL,j/k/l,y = EFgrid,CM,y)2.           
 
4.2.1.1.2. Scenario B: Electricity consumption from an off-grid captive power plant 
16. In this case, non-obligated entity may choose among the following options: 
17. Option B1: The emission factor for electricity generation is determined based on the CO 2 
emissions from fuel combustion and the electricity generation in the captive power plant(s) 
installed at the site of the electricity consumption source. In case of plants that co-generate 
heat and power (cogeneration plants), non-obligated entity may: 
(a) Ignore, as a conservative assumption, the heat generation, if: 
(i) The source of electricity consumption is a project or leakage electricity 
consumption source but not a baseline electricity consumption source; or 
(ii) Electricity generated by the captive power plant is consumed by one or several 
project electricity consumption sources and one or several baseline electricity 
consumption sources; and, the electricity consumption by the project electricity 
consumption sources connected to the power plant is greater than the electricity 
consumption of the baseline electricity consumption sources connected to that 
power plant; 
(b) Allocate the emissions of the captive power plant to heat and power, by assuming that 
without cogeneration the heat would be generated in a boiler, using the same type of fossil 
fuel(s) that are used in the captive power plant. Note that this option requires determining 
the heat generation of the captive power plant(s). 
18.  In case where none of the captive power plants is a cogeneration plant or where the heat 
generation is ignored (subject to the conditions outlined above), the emission factor of the 
captive power plant(s) is calculated as follows: 
 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐿,𝑗/𝑘/𝑙,𝑦=
∑ ∑ 𝑭𝑪𝒏,𝒊,𝒕∗ 𝑵𝑪𝑽𝒊,𝒕∗𝑬𝑭𝑪𝑶𝟐,𝒊,𝒕𝒊𝒏
∑ 𝑬𝑮𝒏,𝒕𝒏
                                                                       Equation (4) 
Where: 
 
2 https://cea.nic.in/cdm-co2-baseline-database/?lang=en  
=== p7
7 
 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐿,𝑗/𝑘/𝑙,𝑦 =Emission factor for electricity generation for source j, k or l in year y (tCO2/MWh) 
𝐹𝐶𝑛,𝑖,𝑡=Quantity of fossil fuel type i fired in the captive power plant n in the time period t (mass or 
volume unit) 
𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑖,𝑡=Average net calorific value of fossil fuel type i used in the period t (GJ / mass or volume 
unit) 
𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑖,𝑡=Average CO2 emission factor of fossil fuel type i used in the period t (tCO2 / GJ) 
𝐸𝐺𝑛,𝑡=Quantity of electricity generated in captive power plant n in the time period t (MWh) 
i=Fossil fuel types fired in captive power plant n in the time period t 
j=Sources of electricity consumption in the project 
k=Sources of electricity consumption in the baseline 
l=Leakage sources of electricity consumption 
n=Fossil fuel fired captive power plants installed at the site of the electricity consumption source 
j, k or l 
t=Time period for which the emission factor for electricity generation is determined (see further 
guidance below)  
 
19. In other cases, the CO2 emission factor for electricity generation is calculated by allocating 
the fuel consumption between electricity and heat generation, as follows: 
 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐿,𝑗/𝑘/𝑙,𝑦= 
∑ [∑ (𝑭𝑪𝒏,𝒊,𝒕∗𝑵𝑪𝑽𝒊,𝒕)−
𝑯𝑮𝒏,𝒕
ɳ𝒃𝒐𝒊𝒍𝒆𝒓
]∗𝑬𝑭𝑪𝑶𝟐,𝒏,𝒕𝒊𝒏
∑ 𝑬𝑮𝒏,𝒕𝒏
                                                        Equation (5) 
Where: 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝐿,𝑗/𝑘/𝑙,𝑦=Emission factor for electricity generation for source j, k or l in year y (tCO2/MWh) 
𝐹𝐶𝑛,𝑖,𝑡=Quantity of fossil fuel type i fired in the captive power plant n in the time period t (mass or 
volume unit) 
𝑁𝐶𝑉𝑖,𝑡=Average net calorific value of fossil fuel type i used in the period t (GJ/mass or volume 
unit) 
𝐻𝐺𝑛,𝑡=Quantity of heat co-generated in captive power plant n in the time period t (GJ) 
η𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟=Efficiency of the boiler in which heat is assumed to be generated in the absence of a 
cogeneration plant 
𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑛,𝑡=Average CO2 emission factor of the fossil fuels fired in the captive power plant n in the 
time period t (tCO2 / GJ) 
Σ𝐸𝐺𝑛,𝑡𝑛=Quantity of electricity generated in captive power plant n in the time period t (MWh) 
i=Fossil fuel types fired in captive power plant n in the time period t 
j=Sources of electricity consumption in the project 
=== p8
8 
 
k=Sources of electricity consumption in the baseline 
l=Leakage sources of electricity consumption 
n=Fossil fuel fired captive power plants installed at the site of the electricity consumption source 
j, k or l 
t=Time period for which the emission factor for electricity generation is determined (see further 
guidance below) 
 
20. The time period t should correspond to: 
(a) The monitored period (e.g. the year y) for: 
(i) Project and leakage electricity consumption sources; 
(ii) Baseline electricity consumption sources if existing or new captive power 
plant(s) are operated during the monitored period at the site of the baseline or 
leakage electricity consumption source3; 
(b) The most recent historical three years prior to the implementation of the project activity 
for baseline electricity consumption sources if no captive power plant is operated during 
the monitored period at the site of the baseline or leakage electricity consumption source. 
21. The average CO 2 emission factor of the fossil fuels fired in the captive power plant n 
(EFCO2,n,t) is determined as follows: 
(a) In case of captive power plants that have only used one single fuel type since their 
start of operation (except small amount of start-up4 fuel), use the CO2 emission factor of 
that fuel type (EFCO2,n,t = EFCO2,i); 
(b) In the case of captive power plants that have used multiple fuel types since their start 
of operation, choose among the following option5: 
 
(i) For baseline electricity consumption, use the fuel type with the lowest CO 2 
emission factor (EFCO2,i,t) among the fuel types that were used in the period 
prior to the start of the project activity; the period considered shall be a 
minimum of one year and a maximum of three years; 
(ii) For project electricity consumption, use the fuel type with the highest CO 2 
emission factor (EF CO2,i,t) among the fuel types that have been used in the 
period since the start of the project activity until the end of the monitored 
period in question; 
(iii) Nevertheless, if electricity is consumed from the same captive power plant for 
both the baseline and project (and/or leakage); and the electricity consumption of 
the project and leakage sources is greater than the electricity consumption of the 
baseline sources, then the CO2 emission factor (EFCO2,i,t) as per sub-paragraph (b) 
 
3 In some cases, the captive power plant(s) at the site of a baseline or leakage electricity consumption 
source may stop their operation after the implementation of the project activity.  
4 If a fuel is defined as a start -up fuel, it should not represent more than three per cent of the total fuel 
utilized in the process, on energy basis. 
5 These provisions aim to address the following issues: 
=== p9
9 
 
(ii) shall be used for both. On the other hand, if electricity is consumed from the 
same captive power plant for both the baseline and project (and/or leakage); and 
the electricity consumption of the baseline sources is greater than the electricity 
consumption of the project and/or leakage sources, then the CO 2 emission factor 
(EFCO2,i,t) as per sub-paragraph (b)6 (i) shall be used for both; 
(iv) Calculate an average CO 2 emission factor for the period t, provided that the 
decision on the fuel mix is outside the control of the project participants (e.g. in the 
case of leakage electricity consumers or in cases where the fuel mix is fixed 
through mandatory regulations or determined by a centralized dispatch authority, 
as follows: 
𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂2,𝑛,𝑡=
∑ 𝑭𝑪𝒏,𝒊,𝒕∗𝑵𝑪𝑽𝒊,𝒕∗𝑬𝑭𝑪𝑶𝟐,𝒊,𝒕𝒊
∑ 𝑭𝑪𝒏,𝒊,𝒕𝒊 ∗ 𝑵𝑪𝑽𝒊,𝒕
                                                                             Equation (6) 
 
Where: 
 
EFCO2,n,t = Average CO 2 emission factor of the fossil fuels fired in the captive 
power plant n in the time period t (tCO2/GJ) 
FCn,i,t = Quantity of fossil fuel type i  fired in the captive power plant n in the 
time period t (mass or volume unit) 
NCVi,t = Average net calorific value of fossil fuel type i used in the period t (GJ 
/ mass or volume unit) 
EFCO2,i,t = CO2 emission factor of fossil fuel type i used in the time period t (t 
CO2 / GJ) 
i = Fossil fuel types fired in captive power plant n in the time period t 
n = Fossil fuel fired captive power plants installed at the site of the 
electricity consumption source j, k or l 
t = Time period for which the emission factor for electricity generation is 
determined (see further guidance below) 
 
(v) Calculate the average CO 2 emission factor, as per equation (6) above, for (a) 
the period of the most recent three years prior to the implementation of the project 
activity and for (b) the monitored period in question and use the value that is more 
conservative. 
22. The selected approach should be documented in the  ICM-PDD and, once selected, not 
be changed during the crediting period. 
23. Option B2: Use the value corresponding to captive power generation as per the latest 
version of the CO2 Baseline Database published by the CEA7. 
 
6 The provisions aim to avoid the situation that project participants may face perverse incentives to use in 
their captive power plants fuel types with higher CO 2 emission factors. This may, for example, apply if a 
project activity saves electricity at a site where a dual fuel captive power plant is operated by the project 
participants. In this case, the use of a fuel type with a higher emission factor would, witho ut these 
provisions, result in the issuance of more CCCs. 
7 https://cea.nic.in/cdm-co2-baseline-database/?lang=en  
=== p10
10 
 
 
4.2.1.1.3. Scenario C: Electricity consumption from the grid and (a) fossil fuel fired 
captive power plant(s) 
24. Under this scenario, the consumption of electricity in the project, the baseline or as a 
source of leakage may result in different emission levels, depending on the situation of the 
project activity. The following three cases can be differentiated: 
 
(a) Case C.I: Grid electricity. The implementation of the project activity only affects the 
quantity of electricity that is supplied from the grid and not the operation of the captive 
power plant. This applies, for example: 
(i) If at all times during the monitored period the total electricity demand at the site of 
the captive power plant(s) is, both with the project activity and in the absence of the 
project activity, larger than the electricity generation capacity of the captive  power 
plant(s); or 
(ii) If the captive power plant is operated continuously (apart from maintenance) 
and feeds any excess electricity into the grid, because the revenues for 
feeding electricity into the grid are above the plant operation costs; or  
(iii) If the captive power plant is centrally dispatched and the dispatch of the 
captive power plant is thus outside the control of the non-obligated entity; 
 
(b) Case C.II: Electricity from captive power plant(s). The implementation of the project 
activity is clearly demonstrated to only affect the quantity of electricity that is generated 
in the captive power plant(s) and does not affect the quantity of electricity supplied from 
the grid. This applies, for example, in the following situation: A fixed quantity of electricity 
is purchased from the grid due to physical transmission constraints, such as a limited 
capacity of the transformer that provides electricity to  the relevant source. In this 
situation, case C.II would apply if the total electricity demand at the site of the captive 
power plant(s) is at all times during the monitored period, both with the project activity 
and in the absence of the project activity,  larger than the quantity of the electricity that 
can physically be supplied by the grid; 
 
(c) Case C.III: Electricity from both the grid and captive power plant(s). The implementation 
of the project activity may affect both the quantity of electricity that is generated in the 
captive power plant(s) and the quantity of electricity supplied from the grid. This applies, 
for example: 
(i) If the captive power plant(s) is/are not operating continuously; or 
(ii) If grid electricity is purchased during a part of the monitored period; or 
(iii) If electricity from the captive power plant is fed into the grid during a part of the 
monitored period. 
25. Non-obligated entity should document in the  ICM-PDD and in monitoring reports which 
case applies, justify why the case applies and provide the relevant evidence. The  ACVA 
should carefully evaluate the case. In the case of doubts, case C.III should be identified, 
as a conservative approach. 
26. Where case C.I has been identified, the guidance for scenario A above should be applied 
(use option A1 or option A2). Where case C.II has been identified, the guidance for 
scenario B above should be applied (use option B1 or B2). Where case C.III has been 
identified, as a conservative simple approach, the emission factor for electricity generation 
should be the more conservative value between the emission factor determined as per 
guidance for scenario A and B, respectively. This means that the more conservative value 
should be chosen between a) the result of applying either option A1 or A2 and b) the result 
of applying either option B1 or B2. 
=== p11
11 
 
 
4.3. Data and parameters not monitored 
            Data / Parameter table 1. 
Data/Parameter PPCP,j and PPCP,l 
Data Unit MW 
Description Rated capacity of the captive power plant(s) that provide the project or 
leakage consumption source(s) l or j with electricity 
Source of Data Name plate capacity of the captive power plant, manufacturer’s 
specifications or catalogue references 
Value to be applied - 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
- 
QA/QC Procedures - 
Any Comment In case of uncertainty a conservative value should be chosen 
4.4. Monitoring Methodology Procedure 
4.4.1. Monitoring Procedures 
27. Describe and specify in the  ICM-PDD all monitoring procedures, including the type of 
measurement instrumentation used, the responsibilities for monitoring and QA/QC 
procedures that will be applied. Where the methodology provides different options (e.g. 
use of default values or on-site measurements), specify which option will be used. Meters 
should be installed, maintained and calibrated according to equipment manufacturer 
instructions and be in line with national standards, or, if these are not available, 
international standards (e.g. IEC, ISO). 
28. All data collected as part of monitoring should be archived electronically and be kept at 
least for 2 years after the end of the last crediting period. 100% of the data should be 
monitored if not indicated differently in the comments in the tables below. 
4.4.2. Data and parameters monitored 
           Data / Parameter table 2. 
Data/Parameter EFgrid,CM,y 
Data Unit tCO2/MWh 
Description Combined margin emission factor for the grid in year y 
Source of Data Combined margin emission factor, as per the latest version of the CO2 
Baseline Database published by the Central Electricity Authority, India. 
https://cea.nic.in/cdm-co2-baseline-database/?lang=en  
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
NA 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Annual 
QA/QC Procedures - 
Any Comment - 
 
  
=== p12
12 
 
            Data / Parameter table 3. 
Data/Parameter TDLj,y and TDLk,y and TDLl,y  
Data Unit - 
Description Average technical transmission and distribution losses for providing 
electricity to source j, k or l in year y 
Source of Data In case of scenario B and scenario C, case C.II, assume TDL j/k/l,y = 0 
as a simplification. In case of other scenarios (scenario A and scenario 
C, cases C.I and C.III), choose one of the following options: 
1. Use annual average value based on the most recent data available 
within the host country; 
2. Use as default values of 20% for: 
(a) project or leakage electricity consumption sources; 
(b) baseline electricity consumption sources if the electricity consumption 
by all project and leakage electricity consumption sources to which 
scenario A or scenario C (cases C.I or C.III) applies is larger than the 
electricity consumption of all baseline electricity consumption sources to 
which scenario A or scenario C (cases C.I or C.III) applies; 
3. Use as default values of 3% for: 
(a) baseline electricity consumption sources; 
(b) project and leakage electricity consumption sources if the electricity 
consumption by all project and leakage electricity consumption sources 
to which scenario A or scenario C (cases C.I or C.III) applies is smaller 
than the electricity consumption of all baseline electricity consumption 
sources to which scenario A or scenario C (cases C.I or C.III) applies 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
For (a): TDL j/k/l,y should be estimated for the distribution and 
transmission networks of the electricity grid of the same voltage as the 
connection where the proposed ICM project activity is connected to. The 
technical distribution losses should not contain other types of grid losses 
(e.g. commercial losses/theft). The distribution losses can either be 
calculated by the project participants or be based on references from 
utilities, network operators or other official documentation 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Annually. In the absence of data from the relevant year, most recent 
figures should be used, but not older than 5 years 
QA/QC Procedures - 
Any Comment - 
 
           Data / Parameter table 4. 
Data/Parameter FCn,i,t 
Data Unit Mass or () volume unit at reference conditions8 per year (in m3, ton or l ) 
Description Quantity of fossil fuel type i fired in the captive power plant n in the time 
period t 
Source of Data Annual data during the crediting period: Onsite measurements Historical 
data: Historical records / onsite measurements 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
Use either mass or volume meters. In cases where fuel is supplied from 
small daily tanks, rulers can be used to determine mass or volume of the 
fuel consumed, with the following conditions: The ruler gauge must be 
part of the daily tank and calibrated at least once a year and have a book 
of control for recording the measurements (on a daily basis or per shift);  
Accessories such as transducers, sonar and piezoelectronic devices are 
accepted if they are properly calibrated with the ruler gauge and 
receiving a maintenance per supplier specifications;  
 
8 Reference conditions are defined as 0 oC (273.15 K, 32ºF) and 1 atm (101.325 kN/m2, 101.325 kPa, 
14.69 psia, 29.92 in Hg, 760 torr). 
=== p13
13 
 
In case of daily tanks with pre -heaters for heavy oil, the calibration will 
be made with the system at typical operational conditions 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Continuously, aggregated at least annually 
QA/QC Procedures The consistency of metered fuel consumption quantities should be cross-
checked with an annual energy balance that is based on purchased 
quantities and stock changes. 
Any Comment Only applicable if option B1 is used. 
 
           Data / Parameter table 5. 
Data/Parameter EGn,t 
Data Unit MWh 
Description Quantity of electricity generated in captive power plant n in the time 
period t 
Source of Data Onsite measurements 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
Use electricity meters 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Continuously, aggregated at least annually 
QA/QC Procedures Cross check measurement results with records for sold electricity where 
relevant 
Any Comment Only applicable if option B1 is used 
           Data / Parameter table 6. 
Data/Parameter HGn,t 
Data Unit GJ 
Description Quantity of heat co-generated in captive power plant n in the period t 
Source of Data Onsite measurements 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
Heat generation is determined as the difference of the enthalpy of the 
steam or hot water generated minus the enthalpy of the feed -water and 
any condensate return. The respective enthalpies should be determined 
based on the mass (or volume) flows, the temperatures and, in case of 
superheated steam, the pressure. Steam tables or appropriate 
thermodynamic equations may be used to calculate the enthalpy as a 
function of temperature and pressure. 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Continuously, aggregated at least annually 
QA/QC Procedures Cross check measurement results with records for sold heat and the 
other energy measurements where relevant. 
Any Comment Only applicable if option B1 is used and if heat generation is not ignored 
(subject to the conditions outlined above) 
 
           Data / Parameter table 7. 
Data/Parameter ηboiler,y 
Data Unit - 
Description Efficiency of the boiler in which heat is assumed to be generated in the 
absence of a cogeneration plant 
Source of Data Choose among the following options: 
(a) Measurement of the efficiency in the case that a heat -only boiler is 
installed and in operation at the site of the captive power plant(s) 
(b) Assume a default value of 100% in case of a project or leakage 
emission source and 60% in case of a baseline emission source  
=== p14
14 
 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
(a) Use national or international standards to determine the boiler 
efficiency 
(b) Not applicable 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
(a) Once at the start of the project activity 
(b) Not applicable 
QA/QC Procedures - 
Any Comment Only applicable to option B1 and in cases where CO 2 emissions from 
cogeneration are allocated to heat and power 
 
           Data / Parameter table 8. 
Data/Parameter NCVi,t 
Data Unit GJ / mass or volume unit 
Description Average net calorific value of fossil fuel type i used in the period t 
Source of Data The following data sources may be used if the relevant conditions apply: 
Data source Conditions for using the data 
source 
(a) Values provided by the fuel 
supplier in invoices 
This is the preferred source 
(b) Measurements by the project 
participants 
If (a) is not available 
(c) Regional or national default 
values 
If (a) is not available. 
These sources can only be used 
for liquid fuels and should be 
based on well documented, 
reliable sources (such as national 
energy balances). 
(d) IPCC default values at the 
upper or lower limit – whatever is 
more conservative – of the 
uncertainty at a 95% confidence 
interval as provided in Table 1.2 
of Chapter 1 of Vol. 2 (Energy) of 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines on 
National GHG Inventories 
If (a) is not available 
 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
For (a) and (b): Measurements should be undertaken in line with national 
or international fuel standards. 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
For (a) and (b): The NCV should be obtained for each fuel delivery, from 
which weighted average values for the period t should be calculated 
For (c): Review appropriateness of the values annually 
For (d): Any future revision of the IPCC Guidelines should be taken into 
account 
QA/QC Procedures Verify if the values under (a), (b) and (c) are within the uncertainty range 
of the IPCC default values as provided in Table 1.2, Vol. 2 of the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines. If the values fall out this range collect additional 
information from the testing laborato ry to justify the outcome or conduct 
additional measurements. The laboratories in a), b) or c) should have 
ISO17025 accreditation or justify that they can comply with similar quality 
standards. 
Any Comment Only applicable if option B1 is used 
 
           Data / Parameter table 9. 
Data/Parameter EFCO2,i,t 
Data Unit tCO2 / GJ 
=== p15
15 
 
Description CO2 emission factor of fossil fuel type i used in the period t 
Source of Data The following data sources may be used if the relevant conditions apply: 
Data source Conditions for using the data 
source 
(a) Values provided by the fuel 
supplier in invoices 
This is the preferred source 
(b) Measurements by the project 
participants 
If (a) is not available 
(c) Regional or national default 
values 
If (a) is not available. 
These sources can only be used 
for liquid fuels and should be 
based on well documented, 
reliable sources (such as national 
energy balances). 
(d) IPCC default values at the 
upper or lower limit – whatever is 
more conservative – of the 
uncertainty at a 95% confidence 
interval as provided in Table 1.2 
of Chapter 1 of Vol. 2 (Energy) of 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines on 
National GHG Inventories 
If (a) is not available 
 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
For (a) and (b): Measurements should be undertaken in line with national 
or international fuel standards. 
For a): If the fuel supplier does provide the NCV value and the CO 2 
emission factor on the invoice and these two values are based on 
measurements for this specific fuel, this CO 2 factor should be used. If 
another source for the CO 2 emission factor is used or no CO 2 emission 
factor is provided, options (b), (c) or (d) should be used. 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
For a) and b): The CO2 emission factor should be obtained for each fuel 
delivery, from which weighted average values for the period t should be 
calculated 
For (c): Review appropriateness of the values annually 
For (d): Any future revision of the IPCC Guidelines should be taken into 
account 
QA/QC Procedures - 
Any Comment Only applicable if option B1 is used 
 
           Data / Parameter table 10. 
Data/Parameter ECPJ,j,y; ECLE,l,y 
Data Unit MWh/yr 
Description Quantity of electricity consumed by the project electricity consumption 
source j in year y 
Net increase in electricity consumption of source l in year y as a result of 
leakage 
Source of Data Direct measurement or calculated based on measurements from more 
than one electricity meters 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
Use electricity meters installed at the electricity consumption sources. 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Continuous measurement and at least monthly recording 
=== p16
16 
 
QA/QC Procedures In cases where electricity meters are regulated (e.g. the electricity is 
supplied by the electric grid – scenario A), the electricity meter will be 
subject to regular maintenance and testing in accordance with the 
stipulation of the meter supplier and/or as per the requi rements set by 
the grid operators or national requirements. The calibration of meters, 
including the frequency of calibration, should be done in accordance with 
national standards or requirements set by the meter supplier or 
requirements set by the grid operators. The accuracy class of the meters 
should be in accordance with the stipulation of the meter supplier and/or 
as per the requirements set by the grid operators or national 
requirements. 
In cases where electricity meters are not regulated (e.g. the electricity is 
supplied by captive power plants – Scenario B), the electricity meter will 
be subject to regular maintenance and testing in accordance with the 
stipulation of the meter supplier or national requirements. The calibration 
of meters, including the frequency of calibration, should be done in 
accordance with national standards or requirements set by the meter 
supplier. The accuracy class of the meters should be in accordance with 
the stipulation of the meter supplier or national requirements. If these 
standards are not available, and meter supplier does not specify, 
calibrate the meters every 3 years and use the meters with at least 0.5 
accuracy class (e.g. a meter with 0.2 accuracy clas s is more accurate 
and thus it is accepted). 
Any Comment The non-obligated entity  do not need to apply for post registration 
changes in the following situations and the change shall be described in 
the subsequent monitoring report and verification report: 
(a) Changing the type of meter during the monitoring period, for example 
from analogue to electrical or vice -versa as long as the meters comply 
with the accuracy class mentioned above. 
(b) Changing the accuracy class of meter from lower accuracy class to 
higher accuracy class. 
(c) Changing the calibration frequency of meter within the range 
stipulated in the national standards or requirements set by the meter 
supplier or requirements set by the grid operators. 
(d) Changing meter type from check meter to bi-directional meter. 
The non-obligated entity may choose not to monitor this parameter for a 
period of time if the emission factors associated to the electricity 
consumed are zero or close to zero. In doing so, the ACVA shall validate 
that the total emissions (project and leakage) do not cross the materiality 
threshold. 
In case of missing data due to meter failure or other reasons for a certain 
period of time, the following options to estimate electricity consumption 
may be applied: 
(a) A conservative value based on rated capacity and full operational 
hours (8760 hours); or 
(b) Estimation of electricity consumption as highest daily value among 
the daily monitored values multiplied by the number of days’ data were 
missing. This is option is applicable for missing data of up to 7 
consecutive days within three consecutive months; or 
(c) Highest value for the same calendar period of the previous years 
among recorded values; or 
=== p17
17 
 
(d) a value of a representative sample of the first batch 9 of project 
devices. In other words, it may be assumed that the electricity 
consumption measured in a representative sample of the first batch of 
project devices apply to all subsequent batches. 
Options (c) and (d) are only applicable to project activities,  where end 
users of the subsystems or measures are 
households/communities/small and medium enterprises (SMEs), 
provided the gap period does not exceed 30 consecutive days within six 
consecutive months. 
           Data / Parameter table 11. 
Data/Parameter ECBL,k,y 
Data Unit MWh/yr 
Description Quantity of electricity that would be consumed by the baseline electricity 
consumption source k in year y 
Source of Data Direct measurement or calculated based on measurements from more 
than one electricity meters 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
Use electricity meters installed at the electricity consumption sources. 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Continuous measurement and at least monthly recording 
QA/QC Procedures In cases where electricity meters are regulated (e.g. in case the 
electricity is supplied by the electric grid – scenario A), the electricity 
meter will be subject to regular maintenance and testing in accordance 
with the stipulation of the meter supplier and/or as per the requireme nts 
set by the grid operators or national requirements. The calibration of 
meters, including the frequency of calibration, should be done in 
accordance with national standards or requirements set by the meter 
supplier or requirements set by the grid operators. The accuracy class of 
the meters should be in accordance with the stipulation of the meter 
supplier and/or as per the requirements set by the grid operators or 
national requirements. 
In cases where electricity meters are not regulated (e.g. the electricity is 
supplied by captive power plants – Scenario B), the electricity meter will 
be subject to regular maintenance and testing in accordance with the 
stipulation of the meter supplier or national requirements. The calibration 
of meters, including the frequency o f calibration, should be done in 
accordance with national standards or requirements set by the meter 
supplier. The accuracy class of the meters should be in accordance with 
the stipulation of the meter supplier or national requirements. If these 
standards are not available, and meter supplier does not specify, 
calibrate the meters every 3 years and use the meters with at least 0.5 
accuracy class (e.g. a meter with 0.2 accuracy class is more accurate 
and thus it is accepted). 
Any Comment The non-obligated entity  do not need to apply for post registration 
changes in the following situations and the change shall be described in 
the subsequent monitoring report and verification report: 
(a) Changing the type of meter during the monitoring period, for example 
from analogue to electrical or vice -versa as long as the meters comply 
with the accuracy class mentioned above. 
 
9 Batch is defined as the population of the devices of the same type commissioned at a certain calendar 
year. To establish the date of commissioning, the  non-obligated entity may opt to group the devices in 
“batches” and the latest date of commissioning of a device within the batch shall be used as the date of 
commissioning for the entire batch. 
=== p18
18 
 
(b) Changing the accuracy class of meter from lower accuracy class to 
higher accuracy class. 
(c) Changing the calibration frequency of meter within the range 
stipulated in the national standards or requirements set by the meter 
supplier or requirements set by the grid operators. 
(d) Changing meter type from check meter to bi-directional meter. 
 
           Data / Parameter table 12. 
Data/Parameter EGPJ,grid,y or EGPJ,facility,I,y 
Data Unit MWh/yr 
Description Quantity of electricity generated and supplied by the project power 
plant to the grid in year y 
Quantity of electricity generated and supplied by the project power 
plant to the consumers/electricity consuming facility i in year y 
Source of Data Direct measurement or calculated based on measurements from 
more than one electricity meters 
Measurement 
Procedure (if any) 
Use electricity meters installed at the grid interface for electricity 
export to grid and for supply to captive consumers use electricity 
meters installed at the entrance of the electricity consuming facility. 
In case of grid and net electricity generation: 
This parameter should be either monitored using bi -directional 
energy meter or calculated as difference between (a) the quantity of 
electricity supplied by the project plant/unit to the grid; and (b) the 
quantity of electricity the project plant/unit from the grid. 
If it is calculated, then the following parameters shall be measured: 
(a) The quantity of electricity supplied by the project plant/unit to the 
grid; and 
(b) The quantity of electricity delivered to the project plant/unit from 
the grid 
Monitoring 
Frequency 
Continuous measurement and at least monthly recording 
QA/QC Procedures In cases where electricity meters are regulated (e.g. the electricity is 
supplied to the electric grid), the electricity meter will be subject to regular 
maintenance and testing in accordance with the stipulation of the meter 
supplier and/or as per the requirements set by the grid operators or 
national requirements. The calibration of meters, including the frequency 
of calibration, should be done in accordance with national standards or 
requirements set by the meter suppl ier or requirements set by the grid 
operators. The accuracy class of the meters should be in accordance 
with the stipulation of the meter supplier and/or as per the requirements 
set by the grid operators or national requirements. 
In cases where electricity meters are not regulated (e.g. the electricity is 
supplied to captive users), the electricity meter will be subject to regular 
maintenance and testing in accordance with the stipulation of the meter 
supplier or national requirements. The calibration of meters, including the 
frequency of calibration, should be done in accordance with national 
standards or requirements set by the meter supplier. The accuracy class 
of the meters should be in accordance with the stipulation of the met er 
supplier or national requirements. If these standards are not available, 
calibrate the meters every 3 years and use the meters with at least 0.5 
accuracy class (e.g. meter with 0.2 accuracy class is more accurate and 
thus it is accepted). 
The electricity generation (gross or net) shall be cross -checked with 
records of electricity sale (e.g. sales receipt). 
=== p19
19 
 
Any Comment The non-obligated entity  do not need to apply for post registration 
changes in the following situations and the change shall be described in 
the subsequent monitoring report and verification report: 
(a) Changing the type of meter during the monitoring period, for example 
from analogue to electrical or vice -versa as long as the meters comply 
with the accuracy class mentioned above; 
(b) Changing the accuracy class of meter from lower accuracy class to 
higher accuracy class; 
(c) Changing the calibration frequency of meter within the range 
stipulated in the national standards or requirements set by the meter 
supplier or requirements set by the grid operators; 
(d) Apportioning of the electricity generated and supplied by the project 
power plant based on a common monitoring meter after: 
(e) ACVA has verified that the apportioning is done by a third party 
(example: the electricity supplier to the grid). 
(f) ACVA has verified that the apportioning is cross -checked with the 
sales receipt; 
(g) The apportioning and method used is highlighted in the subsequent 
monitoring report and verification report; 
(h) Changing meter type from check meter to bi-directional meter. In case 
of missing data due to meter failure or other reasons, one of the following 
options to estimate electricity generation may be applied: (i) the 
conservative value as zero; (j) The low est daily value among the daily 
monitored values from the current crediting period multiplied by the 
number of days with missing data; (k) The energy input to the equipment 
determined by the fossil fuel consumed, adjusted by efficiency. Efficiency 
of the e quipment in this case shall be determined using the 
‘Methodological tool: Determining the baseline efficiency of thermal or 
electric energy generation systems’. (l) For solar PV, installed capacity 
of the power plant adjusted by availability factor. (m) As  a value of a 
representative sample of the first batch 10 of project devices. Estimation 
of electricity generation can only be applied if it is demonstrated that the 
power generating equipment is operational during the missing data 
period11. (a) Missing data period shall not exceed seven consecutive 
days within three consecutive months except where end users of the 
subsystems or measures are households/communities/small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs), 30 consecutive days within six consecutive 
months are allowed for project activities. 
 
  
 
10 Batch is defined as the population of the devices of the same type commissioned at a certain calendar 
year. To establish the date of commissioning, the project participant may opt to group the devices in 
“batches” and the latest date of commissioning of a device within the batch shall be used as the date of 
commissioning for the entire batch. 
11 This can be done through, for example, records in an automated monitoring system and snapshots of a 
webcam 
=== p20
20 
 
                                            Revision/Changes in the Document 
 
Version Date Description 
 
1.0 27 March 2025 Initial Adoption 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   