=== p1
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 METHODOLOGY 
 
BM AG04.002 
Emission reduction through improved  
management practices in rice cultivation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publication Date: 30 June 2026 
Version 1.0 
Sectoral scope(s): Agriculture 
 

=== p2
 
2 of 24 
Table of Contents 
1. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 3 
2. DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................. 3 
3. SCOPE & APPLICABILITY ....................................................................................... 6 
3.1. Scope ............................................................................................................. 6 
3.2. Applicability .................................................................................................... 6 
3.3. Methodology Approval Date ........................................................................... 7 
3.4. Applicability of sectoral scopes ...................................................................... 7 
3.5. Applicability of approved adopted tools ......................................................... 7 
4. METHODOLOGY: BASELINE COMPONENT .......................................................... 7 
4.1. Project boundary ............................................................................................ 7 
4.2. Baseline .......................................................................................................... 7 
4.3. Baseline emissions......................................................................................... 7 
4.4. Determination of baseline emission factor on reference fields ...................... 8 
4.5. Leakage .......................................................................................................... 8 
4.6. Project emissions ........................................................................................... 8 
4.7. Emission reductions ....................................................................................... 10 
4.7.1. Ex ante estimation of emission reductions ................................... 10 
4.7.2. Emission reductions using IPCC tier 1 approach or default 
values ............................................................................................ 10 
5. METHODOLOGY: MONITORING COMPONENT .................................................... 15 
5.1. Monitoring of baseline and project emissions ................................................ 15 
5.2. Monitoring of farmers’ compliance with project cultivation practice ............... 19 
ANNEXURE 1: GUIDELINES FOR MEASURING METHANE EMISSIONS FROM     
RICE FIELDS ............................................................................................. 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
=== p3
 
BM AG04.002   3 
 
1. Introduction 
1. This methodology is adopted and refers to the latest approved version of the UNFCCC Clean 
Development Mechanism Methodology AMS-III.AU (as valid from 28 November 2014). 
2. It shall be the responsibility of the non -obligated entity and Accredited Carbon Verification 
Agency (ACVA) to note of any subsequent changes or revisions in the above -mentioned 
methodology while developing projects and performing validation and/or verific ation activity 
respectively. 
3. The following table describes the key elements of the methodology. 
Table 1. Methodology key elements 
Typical project(s) (a) Rice farms that change the water regime during the 
cultivation period from continuously to intermittent flooded 
conditions and/or a shortened period of flooded conditions; 
(b) Alternate wetting and drying method and aerobic rice 
cultivation methods; and 
(c) Rice farms that change their rice cultivation practice from 
transplanted to direct seeded rice (DSR) 
(d) Optional Project Activities – ‘Projects may implement 
additional activities to further reduce CH4 emissions and/or 
reduce N2O and/or CO2 emissions. 
Type of GHG emissions 
mitigation action 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emission avoidance: 
Reduced anaerobic decomposition of organic matter in rice 
cropping soils 
 
2. Definitions 
4. For the purpose of this methodology the following definitions1 apply: 
(a) Alternate wetting and drying (AWD): A water management practice where irrigation 
is applied at intermittent intervals resulting in alternating wet and dry soil conditions. 
Application of irrigation is based on water depletion measure via a field water tube (15 
cm below the soil surface as threshold) or soil water potential (-10 kilopascal kPa at 15 
cm below the soil surface), which can save irrigation water without yield penalty, hence, 
also termed as “safe-AWD”. 
(b) Continuous flooding: A system of cultivating irrigated lowland rice where fields have 
standing water throughout the rice growing season and are drained only shortly before 
the maturing growth stage and for harvesting the rice (i.e., end-of-season drainage). 
(c) Direct seeded rice (DSR)  - a system of cultivating rice in which seeds, either pre -
germinated or dry, are broadcast or sown directly in the field under dry - or wetland 
condition; no transplanting process is involved; 
(d) IPCC approach - the most recent version of the applicable IPCC guidance on methane 
emission from rice cultivation. The applicable version at the time of approval of the 
methodology is Chapter 5.5, Methane Emissions from Rice Cultivation, Volume 4 of 
the 2019 refinement  to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories; 
(e) Irrigated - a type of water regime in which fields are flooded for a significant period of 
time and water regime is fully controlled; 
 
1 IPCC approach provides for the definitions (e) to (h) (see volume 4 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories for further details, or the latest available version of the same). 
=== p4
 
BM AG04.002   4 
 
(f) Methanotrophs: Organisms that occur naturally or are introduced to an environment 
and metabolize CH 4 to obtain their energy, thereby removing CH 4 from their 
environment. 
(g) Project cultivation practice  - a set of elements of a cultivation practice which is 
adopted under the ICM project activity. This mainly consists of the adjusted irrigation 
method. Field preparation, fertilization and weed and pest control may also be included; 
(h) Rainfed and deep water  - a type of water regime in which fields are flooded for a 
significant period of time and water regime depends solely on precipitation. 
(i) Soil methanogenesis: Microbial process that produces methane (CH 4) gas in soils 
when microorganisms break down organic matter under anoxic conditions, such as in 
waterlogged soils. 
(j) Transplanted rice - a system of planting rice where seeds are raised in a nursery bed 
for some 20 to 30 days. The young seedlings are then directly transplanted into the 
flooded rice field; 
(k) Upland - a type of water regime in which fields are never flooded for a significant period 
of time; 
(l) Water regime - a combination of rice ecosystem type (e.g. irrigated, rainfed and deep 
water) and flooding pattern (e.g. continuously flooded, intermittently flooded); 
 
5. For the purpose of defining reference field conditions for baseline and project emission 
measurements and their comparison with project fields, classify each project field with its 
specific pattern of cultivation conditions, applying the following parameters under Table 2: 
=== p5
 
BM AG04.002   5 
 
Table 2. Parameters for the definition of cultivation patterns  
Nr. Parameter Typea Values/categories Element Source/methodb 
1 Water regime – 
on-seasonc 
Dynam
ic 
Continuously flooded w1 Baseline: Farmer’s information 
Project: Monitoring Single Drainage w2 
Multiple Drainage w3 
2 Water regime – 
pre-season 
Dynam
ic 
Flooded p1 Baseline: Farmer’s information 
Project: Monitoring Short drainage (<180d) p2 
Long drainage (>180d) p3 
3 Organic 
Amendment 
Dynam
ic 
Straw on-seasond o1 Baseline: Farmer’s information 
Project: Monitoring Straw off-seasond o2 
Green manure o3 
Farmyard manure o4 
Compost o5 
No organic amendment (low 
stubbles are left after 
harvesting or straw is burnt in 
the field) 
o6 
4 Soil pH Static < 7 s1 ISRIC-WISE soil property 
databasee or national data 7-8 s2 
> 8 s3 
5 Soil Organic 
Carbon 
Static < 1% c1 ISRIC-WISE soil property 
databasee or national data 1 – 3 % c2 
> 3% c3 
6 Climate Static [AEZ]f  Rice Almanac, HarvestChoicef 
7 Duration of the 
crop with variety 
Dynam
ic 
Long t1 Baseline: Farmer’s information 
Project: Monitoring Medium t2 
Short t3 
 
 
Comments: 
(a) Dynamic conditions are those that are connected to the management practice of a field, thus can change 
over time (no matter whether intended by the project activity or due to other reasons) and shall be 
monitored in the project fields. Static conditions are site-specific parameters that characterize a soil and 
do not (relevantly) change over time and thus do in principle only have to be determined once for a 
project and the corresponding fields; 
(b) Source/method of data acquisition to determine the applicable value for each parameter;  
(c) The values ‘upland’, ‘regular rainfed’, ‘drought prone’ and ‘deep water’, which are regularly used to 
differentiate the on-season water regime (see IPCC guidelines), are not mentioned here, because these 
categories are excluded from a project activity under this methodology (cf. applicability criteria); 
(d) Straw on-season means straw applied just before rice season, and straw off-season means straw applied 
in the previous season. Rice straw that was left on the surface and incorporated into soil just before the 
rice season is classified as straw on-season; 
(e) For these static parameters, refer to appropriate global or national data. The database from ISRIC 
provides soil data which can be used for this purpose; 
(f) Climate zone: use agroecological zones as shown in the Rice Almanac (Third Edition, 2002), or by 
HarvestChoice.  
=== p6
 
BM AG04.002   6 
 
6. With the help of this field characterization, project fields can be grouped according to their 
cultivation pattern. All fields with the same cultivation pattern form one group. 
 
3. Scope & applicability 
3.1. Scope 
7. The methodology comprises technology/measures that result in reduced anaerobic 
decomposition of organic matter in rice cropping soils and thus reduced generation of 
methane. The methodology includes projects such as:  
(a) Rice farms that change the water regime during the cultivation period from continuously 
to intermittent flooded conditions and/or a shortened period of flooded conditions; 
(b) Alternate wetting and drying method and aerobic rice cultivation methods (see 
<http://www.knowledgebank.irri.org/watermanagement>); 
(c) Rice farms that change their rice cultivation practice from transplanted to direct seeded 
rice.2 
(d) Optional Project Activities – Projects may implement additional activities to further 
reduce CH 4 emissions and/or reduce N 2O and/or CO 2 emissions, including use of 
methanotrophs, introduction of low-emission rice cultivars where non-obligated entities 
ensure no material changes in carbon inputs to the system through root biomass, 
avoided biomass burning (of rice residues), reductions in fossil fuel use, improvements 
in nitrogen management (i.e., reduction in total nitrogen applied and/or the use of 
nitrification inhibitors or slow-release nitrogen fertilizers), and application of biochar to 
soils. Any quantitative adjustment in optional practices must exceed 5% of the pre -
existing value to qualify as a practice change. 
(e) Emissions from organic matter are not under the purview of the methodology. 
 
3.2. Applicability 
8. This methodology is applicable under the following conditions: 
(a) Rice cultivation in the project area is predominantly characterized by irrigated, flooded 
fields for an extended period of time during the growing season, i.e. farms whose water 
regimes can be classified as upland or rainfed and deep water are not eligible to apply 
this methodology3. This shall be shown from a representative survey conducted in the 
geographical region of the proposed project or by using national data. This project area 
characterization shall also include information on pre-season water regime and applied 
organic amendments, so that all dynamic parameters as shown in Table 2 are covered 
by the baseline study;  
(b) The project rice fields are equipped with controlled irrigation and drainage facilities 
such that both during dry and wet season, appropriate dry/flooded conditions can be 
established on the fields;4 
(c) The project activity does not require the farm to switch to a cultivar that has not been 
grown before, unless it is a low emissions cultivar and does not lead to yield reduction. 
 
2 A switch from transplanted rice with continuously flooded fields to DSR leads to a reduced flooding period 
since DSR requires non -flooded conditions after sowing until the seed has fully germinated and developed 
into a viable, young plantlet (at the “2 to 4 leaf stage”). 
3 Pilot flexibility for upland and rainfed plantations to be considered on case-to-case basis; non-obligated entity 
may give representation to administrator for same . It is to be noted that the eligibility of said project types 
depends on discretion of the administrator. 
4 Project activities where controlled  irrigation is currently not feasible, may provide representation to 
administrator for consideration documenting future roadmap of transition towards controlled irrigation 
practices. It is to be noted that the eligibility of said project types depends on discretion of the administrator.  
=== p7
 
BM AG04.002   7 
 
(d) Training and technical support during the cropping season that delivers appropriate 
knowledge in field preparation, irrigation, drainage and use of fertilizer to the farmer is 
part of the project activity and is to be documented in a verifiable manner (e.g. protocol 
of trainings, documentation of on -site visits). In particular , the non-obligated entity is 
able to ensure that the farmer by himself or through experienced assistance is able to 
determine the crop’s supplemental N fertilization need. The applied  method shall 
assess the fertiliser needs using for example a leaf colour chart or photo sensor or 
testing stripes. Alternatively, a procedure to ensure efficient fertilization considering the 
specific cultivation conditions in the project area backed by scientific literature or official 
recommendations shall be used; 
(e) Non-obligated entities shall assure that the introduced cultivation practice, including 
the specific cultivation elements, technologies and use of crop protection products, is 
not subject to any local regulatory restrictions; 
(f) Except the case where the default value approach indicated in section 5.1.2 “Emission 
reductions using IPCC tier 1 approach or default values” is chosen for emission 
reductions calculations,  have access to infrastructure to measure CH4 emissions from 
reference fields using closed chamber method and laboratory analysis; 
 
3.3. Methodology Approval Date 
9. The date of adoption of this document shall be effective from 30 June 2026. 
3.4. Applicability of sectoral scopes 
10. For validation and verification of ICM projects by a designated ACVA using this methodology, 
the application of Sectoral Scope 04: Agriculture is mandatory. 
3.5. Applicability of approved adopted tools 
11. This methodology also refers to the latest approved versions of the following adopted ICM 
tools: 
a) “BM-T-001: Combined tool to identify the baseline scenario and demonstrate 
additionality” (hereinafter referred as “BM-T-001”); 
 
4. Methodology: Baseline Component 
4.1. Project boundary 
12. The geographic boundary encompasses the rice fields where the cultivation method and water 
regime are changed. The spatial extent of the project boundary includes all fields that change 
the cultivation method in the context of the project activity. 
4.2. Baseline 
13. The baseline scenario is the continuation of the current practice e.g. transplanted and 
continuously flooded rice cultivation in the project fields. 
4.3. Baseline emissions 
14. The baseline emissions shall be calculated on a seasonal basis using the following formula: 
=
s
sy BEBE
 
Equation (1) 

=
− =
G
g
CHgsgsBLs GWPAEFBE
1
4
3
,,, 10
 
Equation (2) 
=== p8
 
BM AG04.002   8 
 
Where: 
yBE
 
= Baseline emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
sBE
 = Baseline emissions from project fields in season s (t CO2e) 
gsBLEF ,,
 
= Baseline emission factor of group g in season  s (kgCH4/ha per 
season) 
gsA ,
 
= Area of project fields of group g in season s (ha) 
4CHGWP
 = Global warming potential of CH4 (t CO2e/t CH4):29.85 
g = Group g, covers all project fields with the same cultivation pattern 
as determined with the help of Table 2 (G = total number of groups) 
4.4. Determination of baseline emission factor on reference fields 
15. Baseline reference fields shall be set up in a way that they are representative of baseline 
emissions in the project rice fields. For each group of fields with the same cultivation pattern, 
as defined with the help of Table 2, at least three reference fields with the same pattern shall 
be determined in the project area. On these fields, measurements using the closed chamber 
method shall be carried out, each resulting in an emission factor expressed as kgCH 4/ha per 
season. Non obligated entity may include re mote sensing (SAR/NDVI ) and GIS as optional 
process for water regime/crop growth monitoring. The seasonally integrated baseline emission 
factor 
gsBLEF ,,  shall be derived as average value from the three measurements for each group 
(see the appendix for guidelines on methane measurement). 
4.5. Leakage 
16. Any effects of the project activity on GHG emissions outside the project boundary are deemed 
to be negligible and do not have to be considered under this methodology. 
4.6. Project emissions 
17. Project emissions consist of the CH4 emissions, which will still be emitted under the changed 
cultivation practice. Due to the optimized N fertilization practice (cf. applicability criteria in 
paragraph 3(d) , N fertilizer control), N2O emissions should be accounted if it significantly 
increases from the baseline. The project should not lead to an increased application of fertiliser 
in the baseline, which shall be ascertained through interviews, purchase records, fertiliser 
application log books, interviews with experts, etc. In the project scenario, fertiliser application 
shall be recorded in the log books or farm records. If there is an increase in the application 
rate of fertilisers, then emissions from N2O shall be accounted as project emissions. Emissions 
from land preparation should also be ascertained if they are significant. 
18. Project emissions from project fields are calculated on a seasonal basis as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝑦 = ∑ 𝑃𝐸𝑠 + 𝑃𝐸𝑛 + 𝑃𝐸𝑙
𝑠
 Equation (3) 
Where: 
yPE
 
= Project emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
 
5 IPCC Global Warming Potential Values 07082024 
=== p9
 
BM AG04.002   9 
 
sPE
 = Project emissions from project fields in season s (t CO2e) 
PEn = Project emissions (N2O) from N-inputs in the project fields (tCO2e)  
PEl = Project emissions (CO2) from fields preparations (tCO2e) 
 
19. CH4 project emissions: CH4 emissions from project fields are calculated on a seasonal basis 
as follows: 
𝑃𝐸𝑠 = ∑ 𝐸𝐹𝑃,𝑠,𝑔 × 𝐴𝑠,𝑔 × 10−3 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4
𝐺
𝑔=1
 
Equation (4) 
Where: 
sPE
 = Project emissions from project fields in season s (t CO2e) 
gsPEF ,,
 
= Project emission factor of group g in season  s (kgCH4/ha per 
season) 
gsA ,
 
= Area of project fields of group g in season s (ha) 
4CHGWP
 = Global warming potential of CH4 (t CO2e/t CH4):29.8 
g = Group g, covers all project fields with the same cultivation pattern 
as determined with the help of Table 2 (G = total number of groups) 
 
20. The seasonally integrated project emission factor shall be determined using measurements 
on at least three project reference fields that fulfil the same conditions as the baseline 
reference fields, with the difference that they are cultivated according to the defined project 
cultivation practice. Project reference fields shall be established close to the baseline 
reference fields and begin with the growing season at the same time. Project emissions is the 
average of the measurement results from the three reference fields. 
21. N2O emission: The increment in N2O emission associated with AWD is calculated by assuming 
that there is no increase in N input and that there may be an expected increase in emissions 
associated with AWD systems in comparison to continuously flooded rice systems. The 
increment in N2O emission associated with AWD is calculated for the application of N fertiliser 
in the project. The N2O emission is calculated as per the equation below. 
𝑃𝐸𝑛 = ∑(𝑄𝑛,𝑃,𝑔 × 𝐴𝑠,𝑔) × (𝐸𝐹𝑁2𝑂,𝐵,𝑔 − 𝐸𝐹𝑁2𝑂,𝑃,𝑔) × 10−3 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝑁2𝑂
𝐺
𝑔=1
 
 
Where: 
 
𝑷𝑬𝒏 = Project emissions from project fields in season s (t CO2e) 
          Qn,P,g = Application rate of N -input in the project scenario where the 
application rate doesn’t exceed that of baseline (kg inputs per 
Hectare) 
=== p10
 
BM AG04.002   10 
 
𝑷𝑬𝒏 = Project emissions from project fields in season s (t CO2e) 
𝑨𝒔,𝒈 = Area of project fields of group g in season s (ha) 
EFN2O,P,g = Emission factor for single and multiple drainage: 0.005 kgN2O-
n/kgN input 
EFN2O,B,g = Emission factor for continuously flooded:0.003 kgN 2O-n/kgN 
input 
𝑮𝑾𝑷𝑵𝟐𝑶 = Global warming potential of N2O (t CO2e/t N2O):273.06 
g = Group g, covers all project fields with the same cultivation 
pattern as determined with the help of Table 2 (G = total number 
of groups) 
22. CO2 Emission: Project emissions arising from using mechanical devices (PEl), farm equipment 
and specialised vehicles for land preparation shall be accounted. This can be in lieu of water 
management mechanisms being put in place. If the total emissions resulting from land 
preparation exceed 5% of the total emission reductions in year y, they shall be considered as 
project emissions and accounted for accordingly. In case it exceeds more than 5%, ICM BM-
T-002 shall be used for the calculation of CO2 emissions. 
23. Reduction in N2O emissions arising from decrease in fertiliser usage rate cannot be claimed 
under this methodology.  
 
4.7. Emission reductions 
24. The emission reductions achieved by the project activity shall be calculated as the difference 
between the baseline and the project emissions. 
𝐸𝑅𝑦  =   (𝐵𝐸𝑦   −  𝑃𝐸𝑦) × (1 − 𝑈𝑑) Equation (5) 
Where: 
𝐸𝑅𝑦  = Emission reductions in year (t CO2e) 
𝐵𝐸𝑦  Baseline emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
𝑃𝐸𝑦  Project emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
𝑈𝑑 = Uncertainty Deduction (%) 
4.7.1. Ex ante estimation of emission reductions 
25. For the ex-ante estimation of emission reductions within the project design document (PDD), 
non-obligated entitie s shall either refer to own field experiments or estimate baseline and 
project emissions with the help of national data or IPCC tier 1 default values for emission and 
scaling factors. The approach shall be explained and justified in the PDD. 
 
4.7.2. Emission reductions using IPCC tier 1 approach or default values 
26. As an alternative to the reference field approach indicated in above paragraphs 4.4, non-
obligated entities may calculate emission reductions using the simplified approaches : 
27. Using the IPCC tier 1 approach but undertaking measurements to determine  baseline 
emission factors for continuously flooded fields, as per the following formula: 
 
 
6 IPCC Global Warming Potential Values 07082024 
=== p11
 
BM AG04.002   11 
 
𝐸𝑅𝑦 = 𝐸𝐹𝐸𝑅 × 𝐴𝑦 × 𝐿𝑦 × 10−3 × 𝐺𝑊𝑃𝐶𝐻4 × (1 − 𝑈𝑑) Equation (6) 
𝐸𝐹𝐸𝑅 = 𝐸𝐹𝐵𝐿 − 𝐸𝐹𝑃 × (1 − 𝑈𝑑) Equation (7) 
oBLpBLwBLcBLBL SFxSFxSFxEFEF ,,,,=
 Equation (8) 
oPpPwPcBLP SFxSFxSFxEFEF ,,,,=
 Equation (9) 
Where: 
yER
 
= Emission reductions in year y (t CO2e) 
EREF
 = Adjusted daily emission factor (kgCH 4/ha/day). Alternatively, 
seasonal emission factor (kgCH4/ha/season) may be determined7 
yA
 
= Area of project fields in year y (ha) 
yL
 
= Cultivation period of rice in year y (days/year). This is not applicable 
when seasonal emission factor is determined 
4CHGWP
 = Global warming potential of CH4 (t CO2e/t CH4): 29.8 
BLEF
 = Baseline emission factor (kgCH4/ha/day) or (kgCH4/ha/season) 
PEF
 = Project emission factor (kgCH4/ha/day) or (kgCH4/ha/season) 
cBLEF ,
 = Baseline emission factor for continuously flooded fields without 
organic amendments (kgCH4/ha/day) or (kgCH4/ha/season) 
wPwBL SForSF ,,
 = Baseline or project scaling factors8 to account for the differences in 
water regime during the cultivation period 
pPpBL SForSF ,,
 = Baseline or project scaling factors to account for the differences in 
water regime in the pre-season before the cultivation period 
oPoBL SForSF ,,
 = Baseline or project s caling factors should vary for both type and 
amount of organic amendment applied 
Ud  
 
= Uncertainty deductions: Apply default value of 15% for IPCC 
default values (global, regional or country specific). 
28. The baseline emission factor for continuously flooded fields without organic amendments (
cBLEF ,
) shall be either determined ex-ante prior to the start of the project activity (in this case 
the ex-ante value should be used to calculate emission reduction during the crediting period) 
or monitored annually (in this case, the ex-post values should be used to calculate emissions 
reduction during the crediting period) . At least three reference fields shall be chosen in the 
 
7 In this methodology, “season” means an entire cropping season (from land preparation until harvest or post 
season drainage). If a seasonal emission factor is opted, it should be based on measurements over the entire 
period of flooding and should account for fluxes of soil-entrapped methane that typically occur upon drainage. 
8 For all scaling factors used in the methodology, the average values in 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories are chosen. Uncertainties related to scaling factors may be considered in the 
future revision of the methodology. 
=== p12
 
BM AG04.002   12 
 
project area. On these fields, measurements shall be carried out using the closed chamber 
method in accordance with the guidance on methane measurement in the appendix. 
29. Alternatively, the baseline emission factor for continuously flooded fields with organic 
amendments may be determined. In this case, scaling factors to account for organic 
amendments (
oPoBL SForSF ,, ) shall not be applied in the equations (8) and (9) above. 
30. IPCC default for 
wPwBL SForSF ,,  is as follows: 
Table 3. IPCC default values for 
wPwBL SForSF ,,  
Water regime during the cultivation period 
wPwBL SForSF ,,  
Irrigated Continuously flooded 1 
Intermittently flooded - single aeration 0.71 
Intermittently flooded - multiple 
aeration 
0.55 
(a) Source: IPCC 2019, volume 4, chapter 5.5, Table 5.12 
1. Continuously flooded: Fields have standing water throughout the rice growing season and may 
only dry out for harvest (end-season drainage). 
2. Intermittently flooded: fields have at least one aeration period of more than three days during the 
cropping season; 
(a) Single aeration: fields have a single aeration during the cropping season at any growth stage 
(except for end-season drainage); 
(b) Multiple aeration: fields have more than one aeration period during the cropping season 
(except for end-season drainage). 
31. IPCC default for 
pPpBL SForSF ,,  is provided in the following table. For regions/countries where 
it can be demonstrated by official government data  or peer-reviewed literature that double 
cropping is practiced, a default value of 1.0 is used. Otherwise, 0.89 is used. 
Table 4. IPCC default values for
pPpBL SForSF ,,   
Water regime prior to rice cultivation 
pPpBL SForSF ,,  
Non flooded pre-season < 180 days (indicating double 
cropping) 
1 
Non flooded pre-season > 180 days (indicating single 
cropping) 
0.89 
(a) Source: IPCC 2006, volume 4, chapter 5.5, Table 5.13. 
32. IPCC default for 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  is calculated as follows: 
59.0
1 



 += 
i
iio CFOAxROASF
 
Equation (10) 
=== p13
 
BM AG04.002   13 
 
Where: 
iROA
 = Application rate of organic amendment type i, in dry weight for 
straw and fresh weight for others, tonne ha-1. 
5 tonne/ha of straw is assumed as the baseline quantity of organic 
amendment, because the value of leftover straw after harvest is 
in the range of 3 tonne/ha (when harvested manually to the 
ground level, leaving very little stubble and the root residues) t o 
7 tonne/ha (harvested mechanically leaving behind large amount 
of crop residues on the field) 
iCFOA
 = Conversion factor for organic amendment type i (in terms of its 
relative effect with respect to straw applied shortly before 
cultivation. 
0.19 is used for a single crop and 1.0 for a double crop9 
33. Accordingly, default for 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  is provided in the following table. 
Table 5. IPCC default values for
oPoBL SForSF ,,   
Water regime prior to rice 
cultivation 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  
Non flooded pre-season < 180 days 
(indicating double cropping) 
2.88 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  = (1 + 5 × 1)0.59 = 2.88 
Non flooded pre-season > 180 days 
(indicating single cropping) 
1.48 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  = (1 + 5 × 0.19)0.59 = 1.48 
(a) Source: calculated using equation (10) above with default values from IPCC 2019, volume 4, chapter 
5.5, Table 5.14. 
34. The above table is for rice straw only. To include other organic amendments following IPCC  
2019, Chapter5.5, Table 5.14, the data will be: 
(a) For compost, the 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  will be (1 + C × 0.17)0.59; 
(b) For farmyard manure, the 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  will be (1 + YM × 0.21)0.59; 
(c) For green manure, the 
oPoBL SForSF ,,  will be (1 + GM × 0.45)0.59; 
(d) C, YM, GM are application rate (tonne ha-1) of compost, farmyard manure, and green 
manure, respectively. 
35. The calculation of specific emission factor for the baseline (
BLEF ) and for the project activity (
PEF
) (kgCH4/ha/day) is summarized in the table below.
 
9 For a single crop, where the rice straw is usually ploughed back to the soil after the harvest of the crop and 
left for long period of time (i.e. rice straw is incorporated for a duration of > 30 days before cultivation), the 
straw is already mineralized being left in the dry field. Therefore, the readily fermentable C component of the 
rice straw is less at flooding. This gives rise to lesser methane production when the soil is flooded for 
cultivation, therefore, 0.29 is used. 
    On the contrary, when rice straw is incorporated for a duration < 30 days before the cultivation (a double crop 
situation), the rice straw is  not mineralized and the readily fermentable C contents of the rice straw results 
in the formation of higher quantity of methane production, therefore, 1.0 is used. Moreover, the s oil 
characteristics when a second crop follows an earlier one favour larger methane production.  
=== p14
 
BM AG04.002   14 
 
Table 6. Specific emission factors for baseline, project and emission reductions (kgCH 4/ha/day) or(kgCH4/ha/season) 
 
cBLEF ,  
Baseline 
Project scenarios 
Project 
Emission 
reduction 
factor  
(
EREF ) 
wBLSF ,
 
pBLSF ,  
oBLSF ,  
Emission 
factor 
(
BLEF ) 
wPSF ,
 
pPSF ,  
oPSF ,  
Emission 
factor 
(
PEF ) 
 
For 
regions/ 
countries 
where 
double 
cropping is 
practiced 
cBLEF ,
 1.00 1.00 2.88 
cBLEF ,
  
x 2.88 
Scenario 1: change 
the water regime from 
continuously to 
intermittent flooded 
conditions (single 
aeration)  
0.71 1.00 2.88 
cBLEF ,
 
x 2.04 
cBLEF ,
 
x 0.84 
Scenario 2: change 
the water regime from 
continuously to 
intermittent flooded 
conditions (multiple 
aeration) 
0.55 1.00 2.88 
cBLEF ,
 
x 1.58 
cBLEF ,
 
x 1.30 
For 
regions/ 
countries 
where 
single 
cropping is 
practiced 
cBLEF ,
 1.00 0.89 1.48 
cBLEF ,
  
x 1.32 
Scenario 1: change 
the water regime from 
continuously to 
intermittent flooded 
conditions (single 
aeration)  
0.71 0.89 1.48 
cBLEF ,
 
x 0.94 
cBLEF ,
 
x 0.38 
Scenario 2: change 
the water regime from 
continuously to 
intermittent flooded 
conditions (multiple 
aeration) 
0.55 0.89 1.48 
cBLEF ,
 
x 0.72 
cBLEF ,
 
x 0.60 
=== p15
 
BM AG04.002  
 15 
 
Using India default values derived from IPCC tier 2 approach. 
36. Emission reductions using IPCC tier 2 approach: In Tier 2 approach, country -specific 
emission factors and/or scaling factors shall be used. The country -specific factors are 
necessary to consider the local impact of the condition that influence CH4 emissions. Peer-
reviewed scientific literature on methane emission in rice fields may be used that 
represents similar agroclimatic conditions and cultural practices.  These conditions include 
different ecosystems, water regimes, type and amount of organic amendments, and other 
conditions that may cause CH 4 emissions to vary. Ideally, country-specific emission 
factors shall be developed through collection of field data such as effects of soil type and 
rice cultivar. It is encouraged to implement the method at the most disaggregated level 
and to incorporate the multitude of conditions that influence CH 4 emissions. Project 
emission would be calculated as per section 4.6 of this methodology. The emission 
reduction will be calculated as per section 4.7.  
 
(Optional) IPCC Tier 3 approach to measurement of emission reduction: Modelling  
37. An acceptable model is used to estimate GHG flux. It must be demonstrated that the model 
domain sufficiently covers any potential flux changes in CH 4 (soil methanogenesis) and 
N2O (if modeled) associated with the implementation of project activities, including 
changes in the water regime, cultivation period (duration), fertilization practices, and 
changes in rice varieties. Neither initial nor periodic measurements of CH4 and N2O fluxes 
are required as part of project monitoring. High-quality observed experimental data on soil 
CH4 and N 2O emissions from controlled research trials or approved data sources. 
Measured datasets must be drawn from peer -reviewed and published experimental 
datasets with measurements of N2O and CH4 fluxes, ideally using control plots to test the 
impact of practice change on GHG fluxes. Datasets may also be drawn from a benchmark 
database maintained by a third party or from measurements made within the project 
boundary. Other GHG fluxes not covered by the model domain (such as CO2 due to liming, 
CO2 from fossil fuel usage, and avoided biomass burning) must be accounted for using 
the default emission factor approach.  
38. Data collected from deployment of gas chambers can be used to strengthen the modelling 
approach as a verification method for the emission factors calibrated. 
 
5. Methodology: Monitoring Component 
5.1. Monitoring of baseline and project emissions 
39. The following parameters shall be monitored as per the  below. The applicable 
requirements specified in the “ Detailed Procedure for Offset Mechanism under CCTS ” 
(e.g. calibration requirements, sampling requirements) shall be taken into account by the 
non-obligated entities. 
 
Data / Parameter table 1.  
Data / Parameter: EFBL, s, g 
Data unit: kgCH4/ha per season 
Description: Baseline emission factor 
Source of data: - 
Measurement 
procedures (if any): 
As per the instructions in the appendix (Guidelines for measuring 
methane emissions from rice fields) and IPCC 2019, volume 4, chapter 
5.5. 
=== p16
 
BM AG04.002  
 16 
 
Monitoring frequency: Regular measurements as per closed chamber method guidance, 
seasonally integrated 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: - 
 
Data / Parameter table 2.  
Data / Parameter: EFBL, c 
Data unit: kgCH4/ha/day or kgCH4/ha/season 
Description: Baseline emission factor for continuously flooded fields without organic 
amendments 
Source of data: - 
Measurement 
procedures (if any): 
As per the instructions in the appendix (Guidelines for measuring 
methane emissions from rice fields) and IPCC 2019, volume 4, chapter 
5.5. 
Monitoring frequency: Determined ex ante prior to the start of the project activity (in this case, 
the ex-ante value should be used to calculate emissions reduction 
during the crediting period) or monitored annually 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: - 
 
Data / Parameter table 3.  
Data / Parameter: EFP, s, g 
Data unit: kgCH4/ha per season 
Description: Project emission factor 
Source of data: - 
Measurement 
procedures (if any): 
As per the instructions in the appendix (Guidelines for measuring 
methane emissions from rice fields) and IPCC 2019, volume 4, chapter 
5.5. 
Monitoring frequency: Regular measurements as per closed chamber method guidance, 
seasonally integrated 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: - 
Data / Parameter table 4.  
Data / Parameter: As. g 
Data unit: ha 
Description: Aggregated project area in a given season s 
Source of data: - 
=== p17
 
BM AG04.002  
 17 
 
Measurement 
procedures (if any): 
To be determined by collecting the project field sizes in a project 
database. The size of project fields shall be determined by GPS or 
satellite data. Should such technologies not be available, established 
field size measurement approaches shall be used pr ovided that 
uncertainties are taken into account in a conservative manner 
Monitoring frequency: Every season 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: Only compliant farms are considered  
 
Data / Parameter table 5.  
Data / Parameter: Ay 
Data unit: ha 
Description: Aggregated project area in year y. 
Source of data: - 
Measurement 
procedures (if any): 
To be determined by collecting the project field sizes in a project 
database. The size of project fields shall be determined by GPS or 
satellite data. Should such technologies not be available, established 
field size measurement approaches shall be used pr ovided that 
uncertainties are taken into account in a conservative manner 
Monitoring frequency: Every year 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: This parameter is only required to monitor if approach mentioned under 
IPCC Tier 1 and Tier 2  is used.Only compliant farms are considered  
 
Data / Parameter table 6.  
Data / Parameter: Ly 
Data unit: days/year 
Description: Cultivation period of rice in year y 
Source of data: - 
Measurement 
procedures (if any): 
To be determined by using cultivation logbooks 
Monitoring frequency: Every year 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: This parameter is only required to be monitored if approach 
mentioned under IPCC Tier 1 and Tier 2 is used. Only compliant 
farms are considered  
  
Data / Parameter table 7.  
Data/Parameter: Organic amendment 
Data unit: Kg 
=== p18
 
BM AG04.002  
 18 
 
Description: Organic amendment can be categorized  - Straw on-season, Green 
manure, Straw off-season, Farmyard manure, Compost, No organic 
amendment 
Source of data: For baseline: Can be based on studies that are relevant to the area, 
information from official sources or reputed research bodies, 
interviews with farmers, or other such records of applications in the 
baseline. Sampling is allowed. 
For project scenario: Information recorded by a farmer in logbooks 
during the application or in a digital database, compiled into a 
spreadsheet for the entire project. 
Monitoring frequency: Annual 
QA/QC procedures: Quantity of organic amendments to be recorded category wise for 
items provided in ‘description’ above. 
Any comment: - 
 
Data / Parameter table 8.  
Data/Parameter: Synthetic fertilizer 
Data unit: kg 
Description: Quantity of synthetic fertiliser applied in the project fields. 
Source of data: For baseline: Can be based on studies that are relevant to the area, 
information from official sources or reputed research bodies, interviews 
with farmers, or other such records of applications in the baseline. 
Sampling is allowed. 
 The information recorded by farmers in logbooks during the application, 
compiled into a spreadsheet for the entire project. 
Monitoring frequency: Annual 
QA/QC procedures: - 
Any comment: - 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data / Parameter table 9.  
Data/Parameter: 𝑄𝐹,𝑖 
Data unit: Liter 
Description: Quantity of fossil fuel consumed by farming equipment  and specialised 
vehicles (tractors, land movers,  etc.,) during land  preparation for 
implementing the project. The same will be used to calculate  project 
emissions from land preparation. 
Source of data: Records of the type of equipment used, type of fuel and time operated 
can be estimated using operational records. 
Monitoring frequency: Only year 1 of field operation of respective project fields 
=== p19
 
BM AG04.002  
 19 
 
QA/QC procedures: IPCC default values to be applied for emission calculation. Efficiency of 
equipment (if required) shall follow  manufacturer’s manual or details of 
comparable devices. 
Any comment: To be monitored only for the first year of field operation. Emissions from 
land preparation beyond the first year of field operation are  deemed to 
be insignificant. 
 
            Data / Parameter table 10.  
Data / Parameter: 𝑄𝑁,P,𝑔 
Data unit: kg N-input per hectare 
Description: Application rate of N-inputs in the project scenario in area group g where 
it exceeds the baseline application rate 
Source of data: Fertiliser application logbooks from farmers, surveys among farmers. 
Monitoring frequency Annual 
QA/QC procedures Consolidated purchase receipts could be considered to check the N -
inputs. 
Any comment: - 
 
5.2. Monitoring of farmers’ compliance with project cultivation practice 
40. In order to determine whether the project fields are cultivated according to the project 
cultivation practice as defined by the project activity and thus assure that measurements 
on the reference fields are representative for the emissions from the project fields, a 
cultivation logbook/digital records10 shall be maintained for all project fields. With the help 
 
10 Under this methodology, non-obligated entities are encouraged to employ digital monitoring, reporting, 
and verification (DMRV) tools, in particular remote sensing, to efficiently enable third -party validation and 
verification of project data. The following best practices and DMRV tools can be employed –  
  
 Different types of DMRV which may be deployed in addition to logbooks –   
1. Digital Record Keeping (for example, blockchain-based mobile applications can be 
encouraged)   
2. Remote sensing   
3. Machine learning/AI (Multiple sources are encouraged for increased robustness)  
 
Non-obligated entities  should: 1) create typical value ranges for key parameters (e.g., using literature, 
government/public datasets) and flag any significant deviation from the range. 2) create a clear process to 
be followed to detect and address deviations and record any/all changes to project data. 3) consider 
disallowing use of data outside the given ranges unless  justification is given. 4) retain all information 
regarding such QA/QC measures, including their Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for such issues, 
summary of ranges, summary of all data inputs outside of range, summary of any interactions between 
relevant parties regarding flagged data, summaries of any changes to data, and should make all such data 
available to the verifier.   
An SOP should be created to handle data for each project. This should clearly identify how data are 
captured and moved between various systems, and whether, when, by whom, and how such data has been 
altered since being ingested into project digital systems. Such systems should be auditable and should be 
made available to the verifier.   
=== p20
 
BM AG04.002  
 20 
 
of the logbook/digital records, all parameters that are part of the project cultivation practice, 
and at least the following, shall be documented by the farmers: 
(a) Sowing (date); 
(b) Land preparation operations, f ertilizer, organic amendments, and crop protection 
application (date and amount); 
(c) Water regime on the field (e.g. “dry/moist/flooded”) and dates where the water 
regime is changed from one status to another; 
(d) Yield. 
41. In addition, farmers shall state whether they have followed fertilization recommendations 
provided with the introduction of the adjusted water management practice. 
42. Non-Obligated Entities shall assure that the project reference fields are cultivated in a way 
that they represent the ranges of cultivation practice elements on the project fields in a 
conservative manner with respect to methane emissions. Should farmers relevantly 
deviate from the defined project cultivation practice, so that their fields cannot be deemed 
to be represented by the reference fields anymore, those fields shall not be taken into 
account for the determination of the aggregated project area  
gsA ,  of that season. This 
requirement shall assure that only those farms are considered for the calculation of 
emission reductions which comply with the project cultivation practice. 
43. Reporting and verification shall be done on the basis of samples of the logbooks from the 
farmers, according to the latest version of the “ Detailed Procedure for Offset Mechanism 
under CCTS”.  
44. Non-obligated entities shall set up a database which holds data and information that allow 
an unambiguous identification of participating rice farms, including name and address of 
the rice farmer, size of the field and, if applicable, additional farm specific information as 
defined above. 
45. A default uncertainty deduction factor of 15% is to be applied on the emission reductions. 
 
Non-obligated entities using DMRV should provide some analysis of the accuracy/error rates of th e digital 
systems they are deploying. Non-obligated entities should consider developing an error threshold for their 
systems, and a rule whereby they would replace any data that fails to meet such thresholds.  
 
=== p21
 
BM AG04.002  
 21 
 
Annexure 1: Guidelines for measuring methane emissions 
from rice fields 
1. The implementation of methane measurement in rice fields requires the involvement of 
experts in this field or at least experienced staff trained by experts (i.e. from research 
institutions). These guidelines cannot replace expertise in setting up chamber 
measurements. They rather set minimum requirements that serve for standardizing the 
conditions under which methane emissions are measured for projects under this 
methodology. 
2. Non-obligated entities  shall prepare a detailed plan for the seasonal methane 
measurements before the start of the season. The plan shall include the schedule for the 
field and laboratory measurements, the logistics that are necessary to get the gas samples 
to the laboratory an d a cropping calendar. The plan shall also include all reference field 
specific information regarding location and climate, soil, water management, plant 
characteristics, fertilizer treatment and organic amendments. 
3. The following guidance is structured according to the steps from field measurement to 
emission factor calculation. Non-obligated entities shall make sure that the measurements 
on project and baseline reference fields are carried out in an equal manner and 
simultaneously. 
 
Table 1. On the field - technical options for the chamber design 
Feature Conditions 
Chamber material Option 1: Non-transparent 
• Commercially available PVC 
containers or manufactured chambers 
(e.g. using galvanized iron); 
• Painted white or covered with reflective 
material (to prevent increasing inside 
temperature); 
• Only suitable for short-term exposure 
(typically 30 min) followed by 
immediate removal from the field 
Option 2: Transparent 
• Manufactured chambers 
using acrylic glass; 
• Advantage of transparent 
chambers: could be placed 
for longer time spans on the 
field if equipped with a lid 
that remains open between 
measurements and is only 
closed during measurements 
Placement in soil Option 1: Fixed base 
• Base made of non-corrosive material 
and remains in the field for the whole 
season; 
• Base should allow tight sealing of the 
chamber; 
• Base should have bores in the 
submerged section to allow water 
exchange between inside and outside; 
• Base should be installed at least 24 
hours before the first sampling 
Option 2: Without base 
• Chamber have to be placed 
on the soil with open lid to 
allow escape of eventual 
ebullition 
Auxiliaries of 
chamber 
• Thermometer for measuring the temperature inside the chamber; 
• Fan (battery operated) inside the chamber for mix the inside air during 
sampling; 
• Sampling port (rubber stopper placed in a bore of the chamber) 
Basal area Rectangular or rounded, but has to cover minimum of four rice hills (ca. 0.1 m² 
minimum) 
Height Option 1: Fixed height Option 2: Flexible height 
=== p22
 
BM AG04.002  
 22 
 
Feature Conditions 
Total height (protruding base + chamber) 
should exceed plant height 
• Adjustable to plant height; 
• Chambers with different 
heights or modular design 
 
Table 2. On the field – air sampling 
Feature Conditions 
Replicate chambers per plot Minimum requirement: Three replicate chambers per plot 
Number of air samples per 
exposure / data points per 
measurement 
Minimum requirement: Three samples per exposure 
Exposure time 30 minutes 
Daytime of measurement Morning 
Measurement interval Minimum requirement: once per week . After fertilizer or irrigation event, 
increase the frequency of gas sampling. For example, gas samples need 
to be collected 2, 3, and 5 days after application of fertilizer. 
Syringe Suitability test (leak proof) before measurement 
Preferably equipped with a lock for ease of handling 
Sample storage until 
analysis 
• Storage < 24 h: air samples can remain in the syringe; 
• Storage > 24 h: transfer air samples into evacuated vial, store with 
slight overpressure 
 
Table 3. Laboratory analysis 
Feature Conditions 
Method Gas Chromatograph with flame ionization detector (FID) 
Injection Direct injection or with multi-port valve and sample loop 
Column Packed (e.g. molecular sieve) or capillary column 
Calibration With certified standard gas each day of analysis before and after the 
analyses are done 
 
1. Calculation of the emission rate for a plot (reference field) 
4. For each gas analysis, calculate the mass of CH4 emissions with the help of the following 
formula: 
1000
1
4,4,4
=
t
CHChambertCHtCH
TR
atmMVcm
 
Equation (1) 
Where: 
tCHm ,4
 = Mass of CH4 in chamber at time t (mg) 
T = Point of time of sample (e.g. 0, 15, 30 in case of three samples 
within 30 minutes) 
tCHc ,4
 = CH4 concentration in chamber at time t, from gas analysis (ppm) 
=== p23
 
BM AG04.002  
 23 
 
ChamberV
 = Chamber volume (L) 
4CHM
 = Molar mass of CH4: 16 g/mol 
atm1
 = Assume constant pressure of 1atm, unless pressure measurement 
is installed 
R = Universal gas constant: 0,08206 L atm K-1 mol-1 
Tt = Temperature at time t (K) 
5. Determine the slope of the line of best fit for the values of  over time with the help of 
software (e.g. Excel): 
t
ms CH

= 4
 
Equation (2) 
Where: 
S = Slope of line of best fit (mg/min) 
6. Calculate the emission rate per hour for one chamber measurement: 
Chamberch A60minsRE /=
 Equation (3) 
Where: 
chRE
 = Emission rate of chamber ch (mg/h 
  m²) 
Ch = Index for replicate chamber on a plot 
ChamberA
 = Chamber area (m²) 
7. Calculate the average emission rate of a chamber measurement per plot: 
Ch
RE
RE
Ch
ch
ch
plot

== 1
 
Equation (4) 
Where: 
plotRE
 = Average emission rate of a plot (mg/h 
  m²) 
Ch = Number of replicate chambers per plot 
8. Further procedure: from the average emission rates per plot of each chamber 
measurement, derive the seasonally integrated emission factor by integration of the 
measurement results over the season length. The simplest way of integration is multiplying 
the emission rate with the number of hours of the measurement interval (e.g. one week) 
and accumulating the results of every measurement interval over the season. Convert 
from mg/m² to kg/ha by multiplying with 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
=== p24
 
BM AG04.002  
 24 
 
 
Revision/Changes in the Document 
 
Version Date Description 
 
1.0 30 June 2026 Initial Adoption 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 