GOLD STANDARD FOR THE GLOBAL GOALS

Soil Organic Carbon Framework Methodology

Version 1.0
Published January 2020
SDG: 13 Climate Action
                                                                                                                                       2

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Methodology Scope and Structure ................................................. 3
2. Definitions and References ............................................................ 6
3. Applicability .................................................................................. 8
4. Project Boundaries ........................................................................ 9
5. Emissions Reduction Quantification Approaches...........................11
6. Baseline Scenario .........................................................................13
7. Project Scenario ...........................................................................20
8. Procedures for Approach Change .................................................23
9. Uncertainty ..................................................................................26
10. Other Emissions ...........................................................................28
11. Leakage .......................................................................................32
12. Double Counting and Benefits Overlap .........................................33
13. Project Buffer...............................................................................34
14. Additionality.................................................................................35
15. Sustainable Development Goals ...................................................35
16. Monitoring....................................................................................35
Annex 1: Eligible Soil Sampling Protocols ............................................ 44
Annex 2: Additional References ........................................................... 45

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:

Developed by: TREES Consulting
                                                                                                                                       3

1. Methodology Scope and Structure

The methodology presents requirements to quantify changes in greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions and soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks through the adoption of
improved agricultural practices. Activities can achieve avoidance of emissions as
well as sequestration of carbon in the soil, both which result in increased SOC
content.

This SOC methodology is applicable for a broad range of activities, from small
scale, low tech land use to industrialized, large scale land management, using a
variety of SOC improvement approaches. As scientific knowledge of SOC impact
or activities covered in this methodology continues to evolve, the methodology is
not limited to a specific activity but provides flexibility to apply the most current
and best-fit systems.

The SOC methodology provides three approaches for the quantification of SOC
improvements for baseline and project scenario. This accommodates the reality
that not all relevant measurements and parameters may be available to all
projects and SOC activities.

    1. Take on-site measurements to directly document baseline and project
         SOC stock levels

    2. Use peer-reviewed publications to quantify baseline and project SOC stock
         levels

    3. Apply default factors to quantify SOC changes, relating to the general
         methodology described in the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse
         Gas Inventories (IPCC 2019) using tier 2 level approach whenever
         possible.

The SOC Framework Methodology structure (Figure 1) features a core
Framework Methodology (this document) and activity-specific modules to be
developed on an ongoing basis.

Figure 1: Basic Architecture of Framework Methodology and Activity Modules
                                                                                                                                       4

The Framework Methodology ensures that quality of projects and
quantification of benefits correspond to the high level expected under Gold
Standard for the Global Goals. The Framework Methodology:

    · Defines requirements and guidance applicable to all activities
    · Ensures quality and consistency across different activities, e.g. in

         quantification approaches and core equations
    · Facilitates development of Activity Modules by defining a common basis

         and approach, as well as the overall requirements (which thus do not
         have to be repeated in the modules)
    · Sets out rules to prevent benefit overlap if multiple Activity Modules are
         applied in a project

The Activity Modules are designed following the guidance provided in
Framework Methodology. Activity Modules provide requirements and calculation
approaches applicable to specific activities that increase SOC from baseline to
project scenario. An Activity Module:

    · Defines activity-specific applicability conditions, requirements and
         potential sub-selection of calculation approaches

    · Presents activity-specific measurement and monitoring requirements
    · May be globally applicable or be limited to specific conditions (e.g. soils,

         climate zones, data availability)
    · May provide activity-specific data sources and/or models to apply (e.g.

         globally or regionally applicable parameters)

The methodology content differentiation between Framework Methodology and
Activity Modules is described in more detail in
Table 1 below.

Project documentation will reference the Framework Methodology in
combination with the applicable Activity Module(s). A project:

    · applies one or more SOC Activity Modules for calculation of SOC accrual if
         the project activities are clearly delineated and benefits from SOC accrual
         do not overlap among project activities.

    · specifies detailed impact calculations, including measurement and/or
         modelling approach, data sources and parameters used.

Table 1: Framework Methodology and Activity Modules content hierarchy

Sections         Framework Methodology         Activity Modules

Definitions and  · Definitions of core terms   · Definitions of activity-specific
references       · Overall references for SOC       terms

                      quantification           · References for selected
                                                    measurement and/or
                                                    calculation approaches
                                                    (models, parameters,
                                                    datasets, key publications)
                                                                                             5

Applicability     · General applicability               · Applicability requirements for
and                    requirements for SOC                  specific activity, practices
requirements           Activities Modules                    and/or quantification
                                                             approaches (e.g. geographic
Project                                                      limitations, additional
boundaries                                                   requirements)

Greenhouse        · Requirements and guidelines · Activity-specific criteria for
Gases (GHG)
                     to be applied at the Activity      the selection and justification

                     Module level for the               of boundaries (spatial,

                     delimitation of boundaries         temporal, carbon pools)

                     (spatial, temporal, carbon         criteria (specific crediting

                     pools); general stratification     period)

                     criteria                           · Specific criteria for project

                                                        area stratification (relevant

                                                        subset and/or additions to

                                                        framework criteria)

                  · List of eligible GHGs and           · List of GHGs monitored for
                       criteria (if any) for inclusion       activity and justification for
                       and exclusion                         inclusion/exclusion of each

Approaches for · Core equations to                      · Identification of

the                  consistently calculate             quantification approach(es)

quantification       impacts                                 applicable for baseline and
                                                             project scenario
of emission       ·  Outline of the three eligible      · Detailed guidance and
reductions (i.e.                                             equations (or models) for
                     quantification approaches,
baseline and
                     including a decision tree to
project

emissions,           select applicable                  selected quantification

leakage and          quantification approach(es)        approach/es as well as key

other             · List of potential sources of        parameters
emissions)
                     GHG emissions and removals · Any specific sources of GHG

                     to be accounted for under          emissions and removals to

                     baseline, project, other           be accounted for under

                     emissions                          baseline, project, other

                  · Guidelines to identify and               emissions, and leakage
                       account for leakage              · Specific accounting of

                                                        leakage and respective key

                                                        parameters

                                                        · Information on key
                                                             parameters where
                                                             customisation is being
                                                             introduced (e.g. in the case
                                                             of a regional application of
                                                             an eligible project type)

Uncertainty       · Buffer Contribution and non-        · Any specific Buffer
assessment             permanence requirements               Contribution and non-
and                                                          permanence requirements
contribution to
Compliance
Buffer
Additionality,  · Reference to Gold Standard                                                 6
sustainable          requirements on
development          Additionality and SDG    · Identification of default
(SDG)                contributions                 SDGs impacts
contributions
                · Guidelines on eligible      · Specific monitoring
Monitoring           monitoring approaches         approach and key
                                                   parameters

2. Definitions and References

2.1 Definitions

a. The definitions contained in the following documents apply:
    · Glossary of Gold Standard for Global Goals
    · Land-use & Forests Activity Requirements

b. For the purpose of this Framework Methodology and associated Activity
    Modules, the following specific definitions also apply:

Baseline:            Estimated soil carbon stocks in the baseline
                     scenario.

Baseline scenario:   The activities that would occur in the
                     absence of the proposed project (business-
                     as-usual).

Calculation period:  The period between two points in time for
                     which a change in carbon stocks is
                     calculated, e.g. the time between project
                     performance certifications.

Crediting period:    The time span in which SDG Impacts can be
                     accounted for and are subject to monitoring.

Crop:                A plant or fungus species that is purposefully
                     cultivated and/or harvested to satisfy human
                     and livestock needs.

Crop residue:        Materials left in an agricultural field or
                     orchard after the crop has been harvested.
                     These residues include stalks and stubble
                     (stems), leaves, and seed pods. Process
                     residues are materials left after the crop is
                     processed into a usable resource. These
                     residues may include but are not limited to
                     husks, seeds, bagasse, molasses and roots.
                            7

Cropping system:            The crops, crop sequences and the
Cropland:                   management techniques used on a particular
                            field over a period of years.
Grassland:
                            All arable and tillage land and agro-forestry
Land use change:            systems where vegetation falls below the
Livestock:                  threshold used for the forest land category,
Modelling Unit (MU):        consistent with the selection of national
Monitoring period:          definitions (IPCC, 2003).
Project region:
                            Areas where the vegetation is dominated by
Project scenario:           grasses (Poaceae); however, sedge
Soil Organic Carbon (SOC):  (Cyperaceae) and rush (Juncaceae) families
Soil Organic Matter (SOM):  can also be found along with variable
                            proportions of legumes, like clover, and other
                            herbs.

                            A change from one land use category to
                            another.

                            All domestic animals. Non-domestic animals
                            are not included unless they are kept or
                            raised in captivity on agricultural holdings,
                            including holdings without land (FAO, 1994).

                            Distinct areas with homogeneous
                            characteristics to quantify a certain SDG
                            Impact.

                            The period between two points in time for
                            which a reduction in GHG emission is
                            calculated, e.g. the time between project
                            performance certifications.

                            The spatial area where people and
                            environment are influenced by the project
                            activities. A project region can be expanded
                            over time. All project areas are located
                            within the project region.

                            The scenario that will exist once the Project
                            is implemented and operational.

                            Carbon (C) located in the Soil Organic
                            Matter.

                            Organic constituents in the soil such as
                            tissues from dead plants and animals,
                            products produced as these decompose and
                            the soil microbial biomass.
                                                                                         8

Tillage:  The agricultural preparation of soil by
          mechanical agitation of various types, such
          as digging, stirring, and overturning.

2.2 References

    · This Framework Methodology refers to and replaces the Gold Standard
         Agriculture Methodology for Increasing Soil Carbon Through Improved
         Tillage Practices V0.9 (released for road testing).

    · In addition to the methodologies, methodological tools, guidelines, and
         key sources referenced herein, the Framework Methodology refers to
         other peer reviewed publications listed in Annex 2.

3. Applicability

Projects shall comply with the applicability conditions specified in the Framework
Methodology and in the respective applicable Activity Module. A project cannot
apply the Framework Methodology without an applicable Activity Module.

The following conditions apply:

    a. Geographic location:
         · Projects are eligible in all countries. SOC Activity Modules may limit
              geographic applicability.

    b. Project area:
         · The project activity shall take place on the same parcel of land as the
              baseline.
         · Project area(s) shall not be on wetlands1.
         · Project area (s) shall not be on forest according to the Land Use &
              Forests Activity Requirements (hereafter LUF Activity Requirements).

    c. Site preparation:
         · No biomass burning for site preparation is allowed in the project
              scenario.
         · Project activities shall not include changes in surface and shallow
              (<1m) soil water regimes through flood irrigation, drainage or other
              significant anthropogenic changes in the ground water table.

1 Wetland: This category includes land that is covered or saturated by water for all or
part of the year (e.g. peatland) and that does not fall into the forest land, cropland,
grassland or settlements categories. Source: 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories ­ Glossary.
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2019/12/19R_V0_02_Glossary.pdf /.
                                                                                                                                       9

    d. Land use:
         · Managed cropping systems (e.g. single crop or crop rotation) must
              have been in place for at least 5 years prior to project
              implementation2.
         · The project activity shall not lead to land use change.3

    e. Food security:
         · No reduction in crop yield which can be attributed to the project
              activity shall be allowed. Activities in the project area shall deliver a
              yield at least equivalent to the baseline yield (five-year average, prior
              to project start). If regional crop productivity changes (e.g. due to
              climatic factors), yield in project area shall not decrease significantly
              (5%) more than yield in the project region.

4. Project Boundaries

4.1 Spatial boundary
The spatial boundary encompasses the impacts of activities that are under the
project owner's control. Activities result in reduction of emissions and/or
sequestration of carbon in the soil, which result in an increased SOC content in
the project area.

Any areas leaving the project during the project duration, i.e. no longer included
in monitoring, are conservatively considered full reversals (i.e. loss of all carbon
sequestered). According to the LUF Activity Requirements the project owner is

2 If a SOC activity module considers a crop change between baseline and project

scenario, the module shall contain evidence/calculation approaches that the change does

not impact SOC stocks negatively in the medium term (e.g. 5 years) or specifically

quantify the changes, considering at least the following parameters:

Direct impacts on SOC and project emissions:

·  Agrochemical inputs, e.g. fertilizer or other nutrient inputs, pesticides, other

   additives

·  Change in hydrology, e.g. due to irrigation, draining and seasonal shift in crop

   coverage

·  Change in crop-related inputs, including plant residue and N-fixation

·  Change in technical management of crop (e.g. machine use for planting,

   treatments and harvest)

·  Seasonal change in crop management activities (e.g. harvesting, fallow

   periods, season without vegetation cover)

Market leakage risks

·  Change in crop revenues (outside the normal market price variations)

·  Change in crop yield (outside of normal variation) expressed in mass (tons)

   and with relation to calorific value and end user (crops for animal/human use)

3 For activities involving land use change from grassland to cropland and vice-versa,
contact the Gold Standard Secretariat
                                                                                10

responsible to maintain or compensate carbon loss to the level of credits already
issued according to the GHG Emissions Reductions & Sequestration Product
Requirements. If new areas are added to the project, they have to be
documented and certified according to the `new area certification' procedures
described in the LUF Activity Requirements.

4.2 Temporal boundary

According to LUF Activity Requirements the duration of the crediting period is
specified on methodology level. SOC projects crediting periods shall be between
5-20 years. The Activity Modules shall define applicable crediting period length
within this range based on published peer-review scientific results for a specific
project activity addressing relevant SOC factors such as climate, soil type, etc.

For retroactive submission of projects and the respective crediting period please
refer to the chapter Retroactive Issuance of the LUF Activity Requirements.

4.3 Carbon pools

This Framework Methodology focuses entirely on benefits from increase of soil
carbon. Benefits accounting is thus limited to the soil organic carbon pool as
shown in Table 2.

Table 2: Carbon pools to be included

Pools                Includes                 Project Baseline Leakage
Above ground         Stem, branches, bark,
                     grass, herbs, etc.
                                              No   No   Yes*

Below ground         Roots of grass, trees,   No   No   Yes*
                     herbs

Deadwood             Standing and lying       No   No   No
                     deadwood

Litter               Leaves, small fallen     No   No   No
                     branches

Soil organic carbon  Organic material         Yes  Yes  Yes

Wood products        Furniture, construction

                     material, etc.           No   No   No

* change in biomass carbon stocks in leakage area to be accounted for in case of activity
shift (see Section 11)

4.4 Greenhouse gases

The primary greenhouse gas monitored with all SOC project activities is CO2.
Monitoring of additional gases such as methane (CH4) or nitrous oxide (N2O)
may be required in the respective Activity Modules (e.g. due to risk of leakage or
change in fertilization). In principle, projects shall monitor all GHG sinks and
sources affected by its activities. Exclusions may be made for impacts with
limited measurability (i.e. quantifiability and data availability) if the omission is
conservative, i.e. does not lead to overestimation of emission reductions or GHG
                                                                                                                                     11

sequestrations. Also, GHG emissions considered insignificant (less than 5% of
total emission reduction and sequestration) may be omitted from monitoring.

5. Emissions Reduction Quantification Approaches

Greenhouse gas benefits from activities are calculated as the net changes in the
soil organic carbon pool as defined below by Equation 1 (below). Consequently,
the CO2 equivalent to the increase in SOC minus project emissions and potential
emissions leakage effects is considered the greenhouse gas benefit attributable
to the project activity. Projects shall transfer a fixed percentage of the issued GS
VERs attributable to SOC sequestration activities into Gold Standard Compliance
Buffer4 according to the GHG Emissions Reductions & Sequestration Product
Requirements. A contribution to Gold Standard Compliance Buffer is not required
from activities involving SOC emission reductions (i.e. BUF = 0%).

-0 = [(,-0 × 1424) - -0 - -0] × (1 - )            (1)

Where:    = emissions reductions to be issued for the calculation period [tCO2e]
ERt-0     = change in carbon stocks in mineral soils in the calculation period [tC]
CSOC,t-0
          = CO2 to C molecular mass ratio [tCO2e tC-1]
44
12        = additional emissions due to project activity in the calculation period
          [tCO2e]
PEt-0     = leakage of emissions due to project activity in the calculation period
          [tCO2e]
LKt-0     = compliance buffer fraction5 [dimensionless].

BUF

Changes in SOC between two points in time (calculation period) are determined
as the difference between SOC stocks at each point as defined by Equation 2:

,-0 = ( - 0) × (1 - )                             (2)

Where:    = change in soil organic carbon stocks in the calculation period [tC]
CSOC,t-0
SOC0      = soil organic carbon stock at the beginning of the calculation period
          [tC]

4 Refer to Gold Standard for Global Goals - GHG Emissions Reductions & Sequestration
Product Requirements. https://globalgoals.goldstandard.org/500-gs4gg-ghg-emissions-
reductions-sequestration-product-requirements/

5 Ibid.
                                                                                   12

SOCt  = soil organic carbon stock at the end of the calculation period [tC]
UD    = uncertainty deduction [dimensionless]

Note: For the first calculation period, SOC0 is equal to SOCBL (see Section 6.1);
for subsequent periods, SOC0 refers to the previous period's SOCt.

5.1 Approaches for baseline and project scenario quantification

To accommodate the reality that soil measurements are not always available to
projects, especially for small community-based activities, this methodology
incorporates three approaches to baseline and project activity quantification:

    · Approach 1: Requires on-site measurements to directly document
         baseline and project SOC stocks.

· Approach 2: Uses calculation approaches, datasets, parameters and/or
    models from peer-reviewed publications to estimate baseline and project
    SOC stocks. Project owners need to prove that the research results are
    conservative and applicable to the project site and management practice.

· Approach 3: Applies default factors to estimate SOC changes, relating to
    the general Tier 1/2 model described in the IPCC Guidelines for National
    Greenhouse Gas Inventories (IPCC 2019). If possible, the Tier 2 approach
    as outlined in the IPCC Guidelines should be applied. Applicability of SOC
    reference values (SOCREF) to be used in connection with IPCC impact
    factors shall be transparently demonstrated for the project area.

    Note that not all of the above approaches may be applicable to all
    SOC activities under this Framework Methodology. Specifically,
    datasets and/or models derived locally may only be applied if
    validated by direct measurements in the project area (Approach
    1). Activity modules must define which approaches are applicable
    for the respective SOC activity. This selection will be assessed by
    the Gold Standard Secretariat at the time of module review.

Generally, project owners shall select the most specific approach possible with
the data available, giving preference to local data sources and models. A
decision tree to determine an eligible approach is illustrated in Figure 2 below.
Further requirements for each approach are given in the baseline and project
scenario chapters.
                                                                                  13

        Identify project activity and      Yes  Approach 1   High accuracy
                  boundaries                                 No deductions

On-site SOC measurements (before and       Yes  Approach 2   Medium accuracy
    after activity or land management                        Deductions possible
       change) ongoing or planned?
                           No              Yes  Approach 3   Low accuracy
                                                             Deductions likely
Applicable peer-reviewed research data /
models (before and after activity or land

     management change) available?
                           No

   Applicable SOCREF value and impact
              factors available?

                           No
                 Perform SOC
                measurements

Figure 2: Decision tree for identification of appropriate calculation approach

6. Baseline Scenario

The relevant baseline scenario is the continuation of the historical land
management practices that are being followed in last 5 years before the project
start date (business as usual (BAU).

To determine the baseline of the eligible project area, the land shall be stratified
into modelling units (MU) according to:

    · Soil type
    · Climate zone
    · Land management / cropping system
    · Input levels (e.g. fertilization)
    · As applicable (to be defined in SOC Activity Modules):

              o Tillage practices
              o Soil properties (e.g. nutrient status or soil health)
              o Hydrology
              o Risk of carbon loss (e.g. fire risk)

For each stratum (MU), SOC measurements have to be performed (Approach 1)
and/or model parameters identified and verified (Approach 2 or 3).
                                                                           14

6.1 Baseline Calculations

For all of the eligible project area, baseline SOC stocks are calculated as the sum
of stocks in each stratum multiplied by the stratum area as shown in Equation
3:

 = =1(, × )                                       (3)

Where:

SOCBL   = soil organic carbon in the eligible project area before project start
        [tC]

SOCBL,y = soil organic carbon in stratum y before project start [tC ha-1]

Ay = area of stratum y before project start [ha]

For each stratum in the eligible project area, baseline SOC stocks shall be
quantified using any of the three general approaches. Different approaches may
be used for different strata.

· Approach 1: SOCBL,y is measured in an adequate number of soil profiles
    to meet GS uncertainty requirements in each stratum (compare section
    16.2). Measurement of SOC shall follow accepted sampling and analysis
    protocols (a list of approved protocols is provided in Appendix 1). As these
    protocols require a certain measure of field and laboratory technology,
    alternate protocols may be proposed in Activity Modules or at project
    level. Deviations from the protocols listed in the framework methodology
    or activity module (or use of alternate protocols) are subject to review
    and decision by The Gold Standard.

    · Approach 2: SOCBL,y is derived from data or models published in peer-
         reviewed literature. Evidence for applicability of the literature values to
         the project site must be provided and validated as described in section
         16.2. Specifically, applicability shall be demonstrated with respect to:
              · Climate factors (e.g. precipitation levels and seasonal distribution)
              · Soil and vegetation types
              · Current and historic management systems (land use category,
                   crops, tillage techniques, fertilization)

Direct application of literature values is only permitted if the source conditions
are comparable to the project environment, evidence of which shall be provided
as described in section 16. Furthermore, literature values shall only be applied
within the spatial and temporal dimensions analysed in the original source (e.g.
SOC depth, timespan for which changes are documented). If a range of
parameter values is given in a source or data is aggregated across various factor
levels (e.g. average SOC in a region, across a range of soil types), the most
conservative value shall be applied.
                                                                              15

Alternatively, SOC values from literature may be verified by comparing them to
measurements in a set of sample sites within the respective project stratum to
indicate conservativeness of the parameter values applied. Such measurements
are required if evidence for applicability (as listed above) of literature values is
deemed insufficient by the Validation and Verification Body (VVB).

· Approach 3: If no data for SOCBL,y is available, it may be modelled using
    Equation 4 (below). The calculation follows the approach documented in
    IPCC 20196 but allows for baseline management practices to be in place
    less than the estimated time to equilibrium (i.e., in case of IPCC default
    factors, less than 20 years). Note that the current IPCC Guidelines only
    provide stock change factors for tillage change and generic inputs
    (fertilizing) for croplands and grassland. Approach 3 is thus not applicable
    for activities increasing SOC in other manners (e.g. through biological soil
    agents) unless additional factors are available for the project area (e.g.
    Tier 2 factors from national GHG inventory).

, =        ,  ×  (1  +  (,  ×  ,,  ×  ,,  -  1)  ×   )  (4)

                                                    

Where:    = soil organic carbon before project start in stratum y
SOCBL,y   [tCha-1]
          = reference soil organic carbon stock under natural vegetation in
SOCREF,y  stratum y [tC ha-1]
          = land use factor in stratum y [dimensionless]
FLU,y     = tillage factor before project start in stratum y [dimensionless]
FMG,BL,y  = input factor before project start in stratum y [dimensionless]
FI,BL,y   = time dependency of FMG, BL and FI,BL factors7 [yr]
DBL       = number of years since introduction of baseline practice;
TBL       maximum TBL = D [yr]

In this approach, SOCREF,y shall be selected from an appropriate scientific source8
or measurements, applicability of which in the project stratum shall be

6 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.
Volume 4 Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (https://www.ipcc-
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/vol4.html)

7 For IPCC 2019 and IPCC 2006 default factors, D equals 20 years

8 Publications, verifiable local research results, soil databases e.g. ISRIC
(https://www.isric.org/explore), Hengl et al., (2014), or the European Soil Portal
(http://eusoils.jrc.ec.europa.eu/; also provides information on non-European soils).
IPCC default SOC reference values (SOCREF) may only be applied if within Gold Standard
Uncertainty Requirements.
                                                                                16

documented. This must include evidence that the SOCREF value stems from a
comparable climatic, soil and vegetation environment, as described in section
16. If evidence provided for applicability of SOCREF is deemed insufficient by VVB,
appropriate measurements are required.

For FLU,BL,y, FMG, BL,y and FI, BL,y factors, default values from the IPCC 2019
guidelines may be applied within a given temperature and moisture regime (see
Table 3 and Table 4 below), referring to the management before project start. If
national or regional factors are available (IPCC Tier 2 or Tier 3 data) these
should be used instead.

Table 3: Relative stock change factors (FLU, FMG, FI) for grassland management
               (IPCC 2019)9

RELATIVE STOCK CHANGE FACTORS (FLU, FMG, AND FI ) FOR GRASSLAND MANAGEMENT

Factor      Level      Temperature  IPCC      Error1,2  Description
value type             regime       defaults

Land use    All        All          1.0       N/A       All native and/or
                                    1.0       N/A       permanent grassland in a
(FLU)                               0.90      ±8%       nominal condition is
                                    0.7       ±40%      assigned a land-use factor
Management Nominally All                                of 1.

(FMG)       managed                                     Represents low or medium
                                                        intensity grazing regimes,
            (non ­                                      in addition to periodic
                                                        cutting and removal of
            degraded)                                   above-ground vegetation,
                                                        without significant
Management High        All                              management
                                                        improvements.
(FMG)       Intensity
                                                        Represents high intensity
            Grazing3                                    grazing systems (or cutting
                                                        and removal of vegetation)
Management Severely All                                 with shifts in vegetation
                                                        composition and possibly
(FMG)       degraded                                    productivity but is not
                                                        severely degraded4.

                                                        Implies major long-term
                                                        loss of productivity and
                                                        vegetation cover, due to
                                                        severe mechanical damage
                                                        to the vegetation and/or
                                                        severe soil erosion.

9 IPCC 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas
  Inventories, Volume 4 Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use, Chapter 6 Grassland,
  table 6.2 (Updated). https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/vol4.html
                                                                            17

RELATIVE STOCK CHANGE FACTORS (FLU, FMG, AND FI ) FOR GRASSLAND MANAGEMENT

Factor      Level  Temperature  IPCC      Error1,2  Description
value type         regime       defaults

Management Improved Temperate/  1.14      ±11%      Represents grassland which
                                                    is sustainably managed
(FMG)       grassland Boreal                        with light to moderate
                                                    grazing pressure (or cutting
                                                    and removal of vegetation)
                                                    and that receive at least
                                                    one improvement (e.g.,
                                                    fertilization, species
                                                    improvement, irrigation).

                   Tropical     1.17      ±9%

                   Tropical     1.16      ±40%
                   Montane5

Input       Medium All          1.0       NA        Applies to improved

(applied                                            grassland where no

only to                                             additional management

improved                                            inputs have been used.

grassland)

(FI )

Input       High   All          1.11      ±7%       Applies to improved
                                                    grassland where one or
(applied                                            more additional
                                                    management
only to                                             inputs/improvements have
                                                    been used (beyond that
improved                                            required to be classified as
                                                    improved grassland).
grassland)

(FI )

Management factors were derived using methods and studies provided in IPCC 2019, Annex 6A1. The basis
for the other factors is described in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.
Source:
3 The bibliography for the following references used for management factor can be found in Annex 6A.1:
Cao et al., 2013; Ding et al., 2014; Du et al., 2017; Frank et al., 1995; Franzluebbers and Stuedemann,
2009; Gao et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2007; Gillard, 1969; Han et al., 2008; He et al., 2008; Ingram et al.,
2008; Kioko et al., 2012; Kölbl et al., 2011; Li et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2012; Manley et al., 1995; Martinsen
et al., 2011; Potter et al., 2001; Qi et al., 2010; Rutherford and Powrie, 2011; Schulz et al., 2016; Schuman
et al., 1999; Segoli et al., 2015; Smoliak et al., 1972; Sun et al., 2011; Talore et al., 2016; Teague et al.,
2011; Wang et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2014; Yanfen et al., 1998; Zhang et al., 2018; Zhou et
al., 2010; Zou et al., 2015
Notes:
1 ± two standard deviations, expressed as a percent of the mean; where sufficient studies were not available
for a statistical analysis a default, based on expert judgement, of + 40% is used as a measure of the error.
NA denotes `Not Applicable', for factor values that constitute reference values or nominal practices for the
input or management classes.
2 This error range does not include potential systematic error due to small sample sizes that may not be
representative of the true impact for all regions of the world.
4 High intensity grazing may be moderately degraded, but do not represent excessive grazing intensity that
leads to severe grassland
5 There were not enough studies to estimate stock change factors for mineral soils in the tropical montane
climate region. As an approximation, the average stock change between the temperate and tropical regions
was used to approximate the stock change for the tropical montane climate.
                                                                                                 18

Table 4: Relative stock change factors (FLU, FMG, FI) for different management
activities on cropland (IPCC 201910)

RELATIVE STOCK CHANGE FACTORS (FLU, FMG, AND FI ) (OVER 20 YEARS) FOR
DIFFERENT MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES ON CROPLAND

Factor  Level      Temperatur Moisture      IPCC      Error2,3  Description
value                                       defaults
type               e regime      regime1

Land    Long- Cool               Dry        0.77      ±14% Represents area that has been
use5                                        0.70
(FLU)   term       Temperate     Moist                ±12%      converted from native
        cultivate  / Boreal                 0.76                conditions and continuously
                                            0.69
        d          Warm          Dry        0.92      ±12%      managed for predominantly
                                            0.83                annual crops over 50 yrs.
                   Temperate
                                     Moist            ±16% Land-use factor has been
                                                                 estimated under a baseline
                   Tropical Dry
                                                      ±13% condition of full tillage and

                                 Moist/               ±11%      nominal ("medium") carbon
                                 Wet                            input levels. Input and tillage

                                                                factors are also applied to

                                                                estimate carbon stock changes,

                                                                which includes changes from

                                                                full tillage and medium input.

Land    Paddy All                Dry and 1.35         ±4%       Long-term (> 20 year) annual
use6    rice                     Moist/                         cropping of wetlands (paddy
(FLU)                            Wet                            rice). Can include double-
                                                                cropping with non-flooded
                                                                crops. For paddy rice, tillage
                                                                and input factors are not used.

Land    Perennia Temperate Dry and          0.72      ±22% Long-term perennial tree crops
use5                                        1.01                 such as fruit and nut trees,
(FLU)   l/ Tree / Boreal Moist
                                                      ±25% coffee and cacao.
        Crop       Tropical Dry and

                                 Moist/

                                 Wet

Land    Set        Temperate Dry            0.93      ±11% Represents temporary set aside
use                                         0.82                 of annually cropland (e.g.,
(FLU)   aside (< / Boreal                   0.88                 conservation reserves) or other

        20 yrs) and              Moist/               ±17% idle cropland that has been
                       Tropical  Wet                             revegetated with perennial

                   Tropical n/a                       ±50% grasses.
                   montane4

Tillage Full       All           Dry and 1.00 n/a               Substantial soil disturbance
                                 Moist/                         with full inversion and/or
(FMG)                            Wet                            frequent (within year) tillage
                                                                operations. At planting time,
                                                                little (e.g., <30%) of the
                                                                surface is covered by residues.

Tillage7 Reduced                 Dry        0.98 ±5%

10 IPCC 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas
  Inventories, Volume 4 Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use, Chapter 5 Cropland,
  table 5.5 (Updated). https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/vol4.html
                                                                                                19

RELATIVE STOCK CHANGE FACTORS (FLU, FMG, AND FI ) (OVER 20 YEARS) FOR
DIFFERENT MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES ON CROPLAND

Factor  Level    Temperatur Moisture       IPCC      Error2,3  Description
value                                      defaults
type             e regime   regime1

(FMG)            Cool       Moist          1.04      ±4%       Primary and/or secondary
                                                               tillage but with reduced soil
                 Temperate                 0.99      ±3%       disturbance (usually shallow
                                           1.05      ±4%       and without full soil inversion).
                 / Boreal                  0.99      ±7%       Normally leaves surface with
                                                               >30% coverage by residues at
                 Warm       Dry                                planting.

                 Temperate
                                   Moist

                 Tropical Dry

                            Moist/         1.04      ±7%
                            Wet

                 n/a        n/a            n/a       n/a

Input Low        Temperate Dry             0.95      ±13% Low residue return occurs
(FI)             / Boreal Moist            0.92
                                           0.95      ±14%      when there is removal of
                 Tropical Dry              0.92                residues (via collection or

                                   Moist/  0.94      ±13% burning), frequent bare-
                                   Wet
                                                                fallowing, production of crops
                 Tropical n/a                        ±14% yielding low residues (e.g.,
                 montane4
                                                               vegetables, tobacco, cotton),

                                                     ±50% no mineral fertilization or N-
                                                                fixing crops.

Input Medium All            Dry and 1.00 n/a                   Representative for annual
(FI)                        Moist/                             cropping with cereals where all
                            Wet                                crop residues are returned to
                                                               the field. If residues are
                                                               removed then supplemental
                                                               organic matter (e.g., manure)
                                                               is added. Also requires mineral
                                                               fertilization or N-fixing crop in
                                                               rotation.

Input   High -   Temperate Dry             1.04      ±13% Represents significantly greater
(FI)    without  / Boreal                  1.11                 crop residue inputs over
        manure   and                       1.08                 medium C input cropping
                 Tropical Moist/
                                                     ±10% systems due to additional
                                   Wet                          practices, such as production of
                                                                high residue yielding crops, use
                 Tropical n/a
                 montane4                            ±50% of green manures, cover crops,
                                                                improved vegetated fallows,
                                                                irrigation, frequent use of
                                                                perennial grasses in annual
                                                                crop rotations, but without
                                                                manure applied (see row
                                                                below).

Input   High -   Temperate Dry             1.37      ±12% Represents significantly higher
(FI)    with                               1.44                 C input over medium C input
        manure   / Boreal                  1.41
                                                     ±13% cropping systems due to an
                 and        Moist/                              additional practice of regular

                 Tropical Wet                        ±50% addition of animal manure.

                 Tropical n/a
                 montane4
                                                                                  20

RELATIVE STOCK CHANGE FACTORS (FLU, FMG, AND FI ) (OVER 20 YEARS) FOR
DIFFERENT MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES ON CROPLAND

Factor  Level   Temperatur Moisture  IPCC      Error2,3  Description
value                                defaults
type            e regime  regime1

Notes: Long-term cultivation, perennial crops paddy rice and tillage management factors were derived using
methods provided in IPCC 2019, Annex 5A1.
1 Where data were sufficient, separate values were determined for temperate and tropical temperature
regimes; and dry, moist, and wet moisture regimes. Temperate and tropical zones correspond to those
defined in Chapter 3; wet moisture regime corresponds to the combined moist and wet zones in the tropics
and moist zone in temperate regions.
2 ± two standard deviations, expressed as a percent of the mean; where sufficient studies were not available
for a statistical analysis to derive a default, uncertainty was assumed to be + 50% based on expert opinion.
NA denotes `Not Applicable', where factor values constitute defined reference values, and the uncertainties are
reflected in the reference C stocks and stock change factors for land use.
3 This error range does not include potential systematic error due to small sample sizes that may not be
representative of the true impact for all regions of the world.
4 There were not enough studies to estimate some of the stock change factors for mineral soils in the tropical
montane climate region. As an approximation, the average stock change between the temperate and tropical
regions was used to approximate the stock change for the tropical montane climate.

7. Project Scenario

Under the project scenario, SOC relevant practices are applied in the project
area. As with the baseline, the eligible project area shall be stratified into
modelling units (MU) according to:

    · Soil type
    · Climate zone
    · Land management / cropping system
    · Input levels (e.g. fertilization)
    · As applicable (to be defined in SOC Activity Modules):

              o Tillage practices
              o Soil properties (e.g. nutrient status or soil health)
              o Hydrology
              o Risk of carbon loss (e.g. fire risk)

For each stratum (MU), SOC measurements have to be performed (Approach 1)
and/or model parameters identified and verified (Approach 2 or 3).

7.1 Project Scenario Calculations

For all of the eligible project area, SOC stocks at time t are calculated as the
sum of stocks in each stratum multiplied by the stratum area:

         = =1(, × )                                                    (5)

        Where:

        SOCt = soil organic carbon in the eligible project area at time t [tC]

        SOCt,y = soil organic carbon in stratum y at time t [tC ha-1]

        Ay      = area of stratum y at time t [ha]
                                                                                                                                     21

For each stratum in the eligible project area, SOC stocks are quantified using
any of the three approaches. If a different approach is used for baseline and
project scenarios in a stratum, conservativeness and comparability have to be
ensured, following the procedures outlined in section 8 below and model
assessment criteria in section 16.2.

    · Approach 1: SOCt,y is measured in an adequate number of soil profiles to
         meet Gold Standard uncertainty requirements in each stratum (compare
         section 16.2). Currently accepted protocols are the ICRAF protocol11 and
         the VCS SOC Module12. As these protocols require a certain measure of
         field and laboratory technology, alternate protocols may be proposed in
         SOC Activity Modules or on project level. Deviations from the protocols
         listed in the framework methodology or activity module (or use of
         alternate protocols) are subject to review and decision by The Gold
         Standard.

For ex-ante calculations, literature references or an accepted soil carbon model
shall be used, following Approach 2 below.

    · Approach 2: SOCt,y is derived from data published in peer-reviewed
         literature or accepted soil carbon models13. Evidence for applicability of
         the literature values and model parameters to the project site must be
         provided and validated as described in section 16.2. Specifically,
         applicability shall be shown with respect to:
                   · Climate factors (e.g. precipitation levels and seasonal
                        distribution)
                   · Soil and vegetation types
                   · Current and historic management systems (land use category,
                        crops, tillage techniques, fertilization)

         Direct application of literature values is only permitted if the source
         conditions are comparable to the project environment, evidence of which
         shall be provided as described in section 16. Furthermore, literature
         values shall only be applied within the spatial and temporal dimensions
         analysed in the original source (e.g. SOC depth, timespan for which

11 Aynekulu, E. Vagen, T-G., Shephard, K., Winowiecki, L. 2011. A protocol for modeling,
measurement and monitoring soil carbon stocks in agricultural landscapes. Version 1.1.
World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi.
(http://old.worldagroforestry.org/downloads/Publications/PDFS/TM11192.pdf)

12 Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) 2012. Module VMD0021 Estimation of Stock in The
Soil Carbon Pool (Version 1.0). (https://verra.org/methodology/vmd0021-estimation-of-
stocks-in-the-soil-carbon-pool-v1-0/)

13 such as RothC (https://www.rothamsted.ac.uk/rothamsted-carbon-model-rothc) or
Century (http://www.nrel.colostate.edu/projects/century/) soil carbon models
                                                                             22

changes are documented). If a range of parameter values is given in a
source or data is aggregated across various factor levels (e.g. average
SOC in a region, across a range of soil types), the most conservative
value shall be applied.

Alternatively, the SOC values from literature may be verified by
comparing them to measurements in a set of sample sites within the
respective project stratum to indicate conservativeness of the parameter
values applied. Such measurements are required if evidence for
applicability (as listed above) of literature values or model parameters is
deemed insufficient by the VVB.

· Approach 3: If no data for SOCt,y is available, it may be modelled using
    the approach documented in IPCC 2019. The land use factors FLU, FMG and
    FI used in this approach have a time dependency based on the estimated
    time to reach an equilibrium state after a management change (for IPCC
    2019 and IPCC 2006 defaults factors, this is 20 years). Equation 6
    (below) provides an approach to account for shorter crediting periods and
    shall thus be applied.

, = , + ,

, = , × , × (,, × ,, - ,, × ,,) ×

                                                                      (6)



Where:

SOCt,y = soil organic carbon in stratum y at time t [tC ha-1]

SOCBL,y = soil organic carbon in stratum y before project start (see
            equation 9) [tC ha-1]

SOCt,y = change in soil organic carbon since project start in stratum y at
            time t [tC ha-1]

SOCREF,y = reference soil organic carbon stock under natural vegetation in
            stratum y [tC ha-1]

FLU, y = land use factor in stratum y [dimensionless]

FMG,BL,y = tillage factor before project start in stratum y [dimensionless]

FI,BL,y = input factor before project start in stratum y [dimensionless]

FMG,PR,y = tillage factor under the project scenario in stratum y
            [dimensionless]

FI,PR,y = input factor under the project scenario in stratum y
            [dimensionless]

DPR     = time dependency of FMG, PR and FI,PR factors14 [yr]

14 For IPCC 2019 and IPCC 2006 default factors, D equals 20 years
           23

TPR  = number of years since project start at time t; maximum TPR = D

     [yr]

Under the applicability conditions of this Framework Methodology, no land use
change is taking place and thus the SOCREF,y and FLU,y values are identical to the
respective baseline values.

For FMG,PR,y and FI,PR,y factors, default values from the IPCC 2019 guidelines may
be applied within a given temperature and moisture regime as in the baseline
scenario (see Table 3 and Table 4), but now referring to the management and
input levels under the project scenario. Note that the same climate zone and soil
type as for baseline calculations shall be used. If national or regional factors are
available (IPCC Tier 2 or Tier 3 data) these should be used instead. In such
cases, time dependency D also has to be matched to the respective source.

8. Procedures for Approach Change

Any approach change between baseline and project scenario calculations shall
meet the following conditions and procedures:

    1. If approach 1 or 2 are used for quantification, change to approach 3 is not
         allowed.

    2. At project start, calculations result from both approaches shall be
         compared. Differences shall be assessed and procedures below applied:
              a. Neutral change: If SOC stocks calculated (Approach 2) or measured
                   (Approach 1) at project start do not differ by more than 5% of the
                   stocks calculated and verified with the previous approach for the
                   baseline scenario (see section 16.2), the transition can be
                   considered neutral and may be permitted. The result of the new
                   Approach shall be applied for stock change calculations. Exception:
                   If the baseline stock was measured under Approach 1 and this
                   baseline SOC value is higher than the new Approach 2 result, the
                   measured baseline value shall remain to ensure conservativeness.

              b. SOC change (modelled): If SOC stocks calculated with a new
                   Approach 2 method differ by more than 5% from the stocks
                   calculated and verified with the previous approach for the baseline
                   scenario, the applicability of the selected dataset or model and
                   parametrization shall be reviewed at project validation. If the model
                   and data is deemed applicable upon review by the VVB, the
                   baseline value shall be corrected accordingly. Exception: If the
                   baseline stock was measured under Approach 1 and this baseline
                   SOC value is higher than the new Approach 2 result, the measured
                   baseline value shall remain to ensure conservativeness.
                                                                                                                                     24

              c. SOC change (measured): If SOC stocks measured with a new
                   Approach 1 sample differ by more than 5% from the stocks
                   calculated and verified with the previous approach for the baseline
                   scenario, the baseline value shall be corrected accordingly.

Table 5 illustrative examples for approach change, change assessment and
outcome.
                                                                                                                                               25

Table 5: Examples for Approach Changes

Baseline scenario  Project scenario                       Change assessment                                                      Change outcome
      approach          approach

Approach  SOC      Approach  SOC        Change rationale                        Change rule                        Review    Baseline    Approach
          Stock              Stock                                                                               result (if     value    for project
                                                                                                                applicable)
Appr. 3   55       Appr. 2   54      The project owner applies a specific SOC   Rule 2a): Difference is less   n/a           54           scenario
          ± 8%               ± 4%    model for the practices under project           than 5% change is                                   Appr. 2
                                     scenario. This model is not applicable          neutral                   Model
Appr. 3   143      Appr. 2   126     under the baseline scenario due to lack                                   confirmed     126         Appr. 2
Appr. 2   ±                  ± 6%    of historic data. A simpler model is used  Rule 2b): Difference is more   n/a
Appr. 1   30%15                      for the baseline calculations.                  than 5% Review
          37       Appr. 2   39                                                      needed                    n/a           39          Appr. 2
          ±                  ± 5%    Data collected in the baseline period has
          12%                        been expanded with regional soil data      Rule 2a): Difference is less   n/a                       (new
          45                         and a regional SOC model has been               than 5% change is
          ± 2%                       created ad published. The project owner         neutral                   n/a                       model)
                                     wants to use the high-accuracy
                   Appr. 2   47      measured baseline data but use a model     Rule 2a): Difference is less   n/a           47          Appr. 2
                             ± 8%    approach going forward.                         than 5% change is
                                     Previous SOC measurement is                     neutral
Appr. 1   68       Appr. 2   65      discontinued at project start. The                                                      68          Appr. 2
          ± 2%               ± 8%    project owner wants to apply the           Rule 2a): Difference is less
                                     (measured) start value in an Approach 3         than 5% special case:
Appr. 1   93       Appr. 3   93      model.                                          higher measured value                   To be       To be
          ± 4%               ± 4%    The project owner intends to perform            to be kept as baseline                  revised     revised
                                     measurements in the project area
Appr. 3   82       Appr. 1   69      throughout the crediting period.           Rule 1): Not allowed                         69          Appr. 1
          ±                  ± 9%    However, such measurements are not
          14%                        available for the baseline period.         Rule 2c): Measurements
                                     Instead, a simple Approach 3 model was          take precedence (even if
                                     used for baseline calculations.                 difference is >5%)

15 Applying a parameter with a high uncertainty will likely result in an uncertainty deduction off the benefits (see Section 9). In the
assessment of the approach change, this does not have an impact.
9. Uncertainty

The project proponent shall use a precision of 20% of the mean at the 90%
confidence level as the criteria for accuracy of total SOC change calculation. This
target precision shall be achieved by selecting appropriate models, parameters,
sampling and measurement techniques in accordance with Annex A - Uncertainty
of LUF Parameters, LUF Activity Requirements for the three approaches under
this Framework Methodology.

Overall uncertainty for calculation of emissions reduction is performed as
follows16:

Step 1: Calculate upper and lower confidence limits for all input parameters

Calculate the mean  , and standard deviation p, for each parameter and
coefficient used in emissions calculations. The standard error of the mean is then
given by

SEp  =    p                                                                 (7)
         np

Where:   = Standard error in the mean of parameter p
    SEp  = Standard deviation of the parameter p
    p
    np   = Number of samples used to calculate the mean and standard deviation
         of parameter p

If SEp (mean standard error) is available directly from the parameter
source (e.g. literature, metadata) it may be used directly in the following
calculations (without the use of Equation 7).

Assuming that values of the parameter are normally distributed about the mean,
values for the upper and lower confidence intervals for the parameters are given
by

Lowerp = Xp - t × SEp                                                       (8)

Upperp = Xp + t × SEp

Where:
    Lowerp = Value at the lower end of the 90% confidence interval for parameter p

16 This chapter on uncertainty is adapted from VCS VM0017 and approved registered
"Gold Standard Agriculture Methodology for Increasing Soil Carbon Through Improved
Tillage Practices".
                                                                                    27

Upperp = Value at the upper end of the 90% confidence interval for parameter p

        = Mean value for parameter p

SEp     = Standard error in the mean of parameter p

tnp     = t-value for the cumulative normal distribution at 90% confidence

        interval for the number of samples np for parameter p (apply Table 6

        below). If no information is available on np a conservative value of 1.675

        (n=3) shall be used.

Table 6: t-values (tnp) applicable in equation (8). Select appropriate tnp value depending

on the number of samples (np) measured for parameter p.

np tnp  np  tnp np tnp        np tnp  np tnp             np tnp     np tnp

        31 1.6973 61 1.6706 91 1.6620 121 1.6577 151 1.6551 181 1.6534

        32 1.6955 62 1.6702 92 1.6618 122 1.6575 152 1.6550 182 1.6533

3 2.9200 33 1.6939 63 1.6698 93 1.6616 123 1.6574 153 1.6549 183 1.6533

4 2.3534 34 1.6924 64 1.6694 94 1.6614 124 1.6573 154 1.6549 184 1.6532

5 2.1319 35 1.6909 65 1.6690 95 1.6612 125 1.6572 155 1.6548 185 1.6532

6 2.0150 36 1.6896 66 1.6686 96 1.6610 126 1.6571 156 1.6547 186 1.6531

7 1.9432 37 1.6883 67 1.6683 97 1.6609 127 1.6570 157 1.6547 187 1.6531

8 1.8946 38 1.6871 68 1.6679 98 1.6607 128 1.6570 158 1.6546 188 1.6531

9 1.8595 39 1.6859 69 1.6676 99 1.6606 129 1.6568 159 1.6546 189 1.6530

10 1.8331 40 1.6849 70 1.6673 100 1.6604 130 1.6568 160 1.6545 190 1.6529

11 1.8124 41 1.6839 71 1.6669 101 1.6602 131 1.6567 161 1.6544 191 1.6529

12 1.7959 42 1.6829 72 1.6666 102 1.6601 132 1.6566 162 1.6544 192 1.6529

13 1.7823 43 1.6820 73 1.6663 103 1.6599 133 1.6565 163 1.6543 193 1.6528

14 1.7709 44 1.6811 74 1.6660 104 1.6598 134 1.6564 164 1.6543 194 1.6528

15 1.7613 45 1.6802 75 1.6657 105 1.6596 135 1.6563 165 1.6542 195 1.6528

16 1.7530 46 1.6794 76 1.6654 106 1.6595 136 1.6562 166 1.6542 196 1.6527

17 1.7459 47 1.6787 77 1.6652 107 1.6593 137 1.6561 167 1.6541 197 1.6527

18 1.7396 48 1.6779 78 1.6649 108 1.6592 138 1.6561 168 1.6540 198 1.6526

19 1.7341 49 1.6772 79 1.6646 109 1.6591 139 1.6560 169 1.6540 199 1.6526

20 1.7291 50 1.6766 80 1.6644 110 1.6589 140 1.6559 170 1.6539 200 1.6525

21 1.7247 51 1.6759 81 1.6641 111 1.6588 141 1.6558 171 1.6539

22 1.7207 52 1.6753 82 1.6639 112 1.6587 142 1.6557 172 1.6538

23 1.7172 53 1.6747 83 1.6636 113 1.6586 143 1.6557 173 1.6537

24 1.7139 54 1.6741 84 1.6634 114 1.6585 144 1.6556 174 1.6537

25 1.7109 55 1.6736 85 1.6632 115 1.6583 145 1.6555 175 1.6537

26 1.7081 56 1.6730 86 1.6630 116 1.6582 146 1.6554 176 1.6536

27 1.7056 57 1.6725 87 1.6628 117 1.6581 147 1.6554 177 1.6536

28 1.7033 58 1.6720 88 1.6626 118 1.6580 148 1.6553 178 1.6535

29 1.7011 59 1.6715 89 1.6623 119 1.6579 149 1.6552 179 1.6535

30 1.6991 60 1.6711 90 1.6622 120 1.6578 150 1.6551 180 1.6534

Step 2: Calculate SOC change (CSOC,t-0) with the lower and upper confidence
interval values of the input parameters

Apply the Lower and Upper parameter values in the models for CSOC,t-0 , i.e.
equations for SOCBL and SOCt, to achieve a lower and upper value for CSOC

LowerCSOC = ModelSOC{Lowerp}                                        (9)

UpperCSOC = ModelSOC{Upperp}

Where:

LowerCSOC = lower value of SOC change at a 90% confidence interval

UpperCSOC = upper value of SOC change at a 90% confidence interval
                                                                             28

ModelSOC   = calculation models for SOCt, SOC0, SOCBL
Lowerp
           = values at the lower end of the 90% confidence interval for all
Upperp     parameters p

           = values at the upper end of the 90% confidence interval for all
           parameters p

Step 3: Calculate the uncertainty in the model output
The uncertainty in the output model is given by

   UNC = |UpperCSOC-LowerCSOC|                                     (10)

                               2×CSOC

Where:

UNC        = model output uncertainty [%]

LowerCSOC = lower value of SOC change at a 90% confidence interval [tC]

UpperCSOC = upper value of SOC change at a 90% confidence interval [tC]

CSOC       = change in soil organic carbon stocks [tC]

Step 4: Adjust the estimate of SOC change (CSOC,t-0) based on the
uncertainty in the model output

If the uncertainty of SOC change models is less than or equal to 20% of the
mean SOC change value then the project owner may use the estimated value
without any deduction for uncertainty, i.e. UD = 0 in Equation 2.

If the uncertainty of soil models is greater than 20% of the mean value, then the
project owner shall use the estimated value subject to an uncertainty deduction
(UD) in Equation 2, calculated as

UD = UNC - 20%                                                     (11)

Where:

UD         = uncertainty deduction [%]

UNC = model output uncertainty (>20%) [%]

10. Other Emissions

Significant additional greenhouse gas emissions (>5% total) due to the project
activity need to be accounted for. This explicitly includes emissions from
increased fertilizer input and fossil fuel combustion. Activity Modules may define
additional other emissions required.

-0 = -0 + -0 + -0                                                  (12)

Where:     = emissions from project activities in the calculation period [tCO2e]
    PEt-0  = emissions from increased fertilizer use in the calculation period [tCO2e]
    FEt-0
                                                                                     29

FUt-0   = emissions from increased fuel and electricity use in the calculation
AEt-0   period [tCO2e]

        = other agrochemical emissions in the calculation period [tCO2e]

10.1 Increased Nitrogen Fertilizer Input

Emissions from increased nitrogen (N) fertilizer input in project scenario as
compared to the baseline scenario are calculated as follows. No differentiation is
made between synthetic and organic N fertilizer. Note that this formula is not
applicable for decreases in N fertilizer input, in which case FEt-0,y is considered
0. To account for reductions in fertilizer input (and the respective GHG emissions
reductions), a separate Gold Standard methodology may be applied.

-0 =  × =1(, - )                                                  (13)

Where:

FEt-0 = emissions from increased fertilizer use in the calculation period [tCO2e].
            Must be  0 in this methodology (i.e. no accounting of reductions).

FEPR,a = N fertilizer input under the project scenario in year a of the calculation
            period [kgN]

FEBL = mean annual N fertilizer input under the baseline scenario [kgN]

T       = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

EFFE    = Conversion factor for emissions from N fertilizer [tCO2e kgN-1]. IPCC
        2019 aggregated default value17 for EFFE is 0.01. Disaggregated default
        values in IPCC 2019 Table 11.1 may be used if fertilizer inputs are known
        per fertilizer type.

FEPR and FEBL shall be documented by the project owner. For FEBL, mean annual
input is calculated based on respective management records for 5 years prior to
project start. If no adequate documentation can be provided, FEBL shall be no
more than 50% of FEPR.

10.2 Increased Combustion of Fossil Fuels and Electricity Use

Additional CO2 emissions from use of fossil fuel and electricity in project
activities (e.g. fuel used by farm machines due to needs for stronger tractors or
additional passes to close/treat the surface, or fuel/electricity for irrigation
pumps) need to be accounted for, unless project owner can demonstrate that
fossil fuel/electricity used in the project scenario is less than or does not differ
significantly from fossil fuel/electricity used in the baseline, in which case FUt-0
is considered 0.

-0 = =1(, - ) + (, - )                                            (14)

Where:

17 IPCC 2019, Vol 4 AFOLU, Table 11.1 (Aggregated default value)
                                                                                30

FUt-0   = emissions from increased fossil fuel and electricity use in the calculation
FUPR,a  period [tCO2e]
FUBL
EUPR,a  = emissions from use of fossil fuels under the project scenario in year a of
EUBL       the calculation period [tCO2e]
T
        = mean annual emissions from use of fossil fuels under the baseline
        scenario [tCO2e]

        = emissions from use of electricity under the project scenario in year a of
           the calculation period [tCO2e]

        = mean annual emissions from use of electricity under the baseline
        scenario [tCO2e]

        = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

FUPR and FUBL shall be documented by the project owner and generally calculated
with the equation below, based on fuel consumption by machine type and fuel
emission factor.

, =  ,, × ,                                                        (15)

Where:

FUi,a = emissions from use of fossil fuels in year a [tCO2e ha-1]

FULi,MT,a = fuel consumption by the machinery type MT used in year a [litres]

FEFi, MT = emissions factor for the fuel used in machinery MT [tCO2e litres-1]

MT      = machinery type (gasoline two-stroke, gasoline four-stroke, diesel)

i       = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For FUBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for 5 years prior to project start. If this is not available,
the amount of fuel combusted can be estimated using fuel efficiency (for
example l/100 km, l/t-km, l/hour) of the vehicle and the appropriate unit of use
for the selected fuel efficiency (for example km driven if efficiency is given in
l/100 km). If no adequate documentation can be provided, FUBL shall be no more
than 50% of FUPR.

Non-CO2 GHG emissions caused by the use of fossil fuel from project activities
(management operations, machinery, etc.) are insignificant and may thus be
neglected.

EUPR and EUBL shall be documented by the project owner and generally calculated
with the equation below, based on electricity consumption by appliance and
respective emission factor. If electricity is generated on-site using fossil fuels
(e.g. in diesel generators for irrigation pumps), emissions from fuel combustion
should be calculated instead, following the approach described above.

, =  ,, × ,                                                        (16)
                                                                                       31

Where:

EUi,a = emissions from use of fossil fuels in year a [tCO2e ha-1]

EUWi,SE,a= electricity consumption from source SE in year a [kWh]

EEFi, SE = emissions factor for the electricity used in source SE [tCO2e kWh-1]

SE          = electricity source type (grid, fossil fuel generator, etc)

i           = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For EUBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for 5 years prior to project start. If no adequate
documentation can be provided, EUBL shall be no more than 50% of EUPR.

10.3 Other Agrochemical Emissions

Additional agrochemical emissions (AE) related to the project activities from
increased use of agrochemicals, especially pesticides or non-N fertilizers need to
be accounted for, unless the project owner can demonstrate that agrochemicals
used in the project scenario are less than or do not differ significantly from
agrochemicals used in the baseline, in which case AEt-0 is considered 0.

If use of agrochemicals (herbicides, pesticides) or non-N fertilizer is significantly
higher in the project than in the baseline scenario, the project owner shall
calculate respective emissions by using specific amounts and emission factors.
Emission factors applied shall be based on manufacturer information or scientific
sources.

-0 = =1(, - )                                                             (17)

Where:      = additional emissions from project activity in the calculation period
    AEt-0   [tCO2e]

    AEPR,a  = other emissions under the project scenario in year a of the calculation
               period [tCO2e]
    AEBL
    T       = other emissions (annual mean) under the baseline scenario [tCO2e]

            = number of years in the calculation period [yr]

AEPR and AEBL shall be documented for each emitter type (agrochemical) by the
project owner and calculated with the equation below, based on emission type,
underlying quantity and respective emission factor.

, =  ,, × ,                                                               (18)

Where:
    AEi,a = emissions from use of other agrochemicals in year a [tCO2e ha-1]
    AQi,ET,a = quantity of agrochemicals for emitter type ET applied in year a [kg]
                                                                            32

AEFi, ET = emissions factor of the agrochemical used (for emitter type ET) [tCO2e
            kg-1]

ET  = emitter type (specific pesticide, fertilizer, or other agrochemical)

i   = formula used for baseline (i=BL) as well as project scenario (i=PR)

For AEBL, mean annual emissions are calculated based on respective
management records for 5 years prior to project start. If no adequate
documentation can be provided, AEBL shall be no more than 50% of AEPR.

11. Leakage

Leakage is defined as an increase in GHG emissions outside the project area as a
result of project activities. Activity Modules shall provide leakage calculations if
applicable.

In the context of this Framework Methodology and respective Activity Modules,
leakage could occur inter alia in relation to shift of crop production to other lands
to compensate for yield reductions or to emissions from increased C runoff.

Under this Framework Methodology's applicability conditions, projects are not
allowed on wetlands, where C runoff could be an issue. Leakage from C runoff is
thus considered 0.

And, concerning yield-related leakage, project sites are normally actively
maintained for commodity production during the project crediting period and
thus yield-related leakage risks are relatively small. Crop producers are
commonly risk averse and are unlikely to intentionally suffer reduced crop
yields. Moreover, under this Framework Methodology's applicability conditions
and the LUF Activity Requirements, projects shall not lead to a decrease in
agricultural productivity, thus all projects shall be set up to maintain or increase
yield. Accordingly, this Framework Methodology's applicability conditions do not
allow yield reduction.

For initial project calculations, LKt-0 is thus considered equal 0.

Nevertheless, if a reduction in yield is detected in a performance certification, it
is assumed that the lost production capacity will have to be made up for on land
outside the project area. Emissions caused by such a shift must be accounted for
as leakage, unless the project owner provides evidence that yield reductions are
caused by factors unrelated to the project activity, e.g. regional yield reduction
due to weather.

Equation 19 is applied to calculate the carbon losses resulting from a reduction
in crop yield (CY) and activity shift to a non-project land (leakage area) in a
specific calculation period. In order to avoid undue accounting for leakage after
temporary yield increases (i.e. no additional losses compared to the baseline
                                                                                                    33

yield), reduction in crop yield is always calculated against the lowest yield in the
project area since project start. Note that under these conditions, leakage shall
only be calculated with Equation 19 if yield CYt is lower than the minimal yield
CYmin. Accounting of positive leakage is not allowed.

LK-0 =  -     ×    ×  (BC+,-0  +            ,-0  +  ,-0)  (19)
            

Where:

LKt-0   = emissions due to shift of production to non-project lands (leakage
        area) [tCO2e]

CYt     = crop yield in the project area at time t (5-year average) [kg ha-1]

CYmin   = lowest crop yield in the project area in any calculation period since
        project start (5-year average) [kg ha-1]

CYBL    = crop yield in the project area under the baseline scenario (5-year
        average) [kg ha-1]

A       = total eligible project area [ha]

BCLA    = change in biomass carbon stocks in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

SOCLA,t-0 = change in soil organic carbon stocks in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

FELA,t-0 = change in emissions from use of fertilizer in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

FULA,t-0 = change in emissions from fuel use in leakage area [tCO2e ha-1]

CYt, CYmin and CYBL are based on project owner's documentation. For each point
in time, the previous five years' average is used as yield quantity. Note that for
the first calculation period CYmin equals CYBL.

BCLA, SOCLA, FELA, FULA are calculated as the difference between respective
carbon stocks on the land to which the activity would most likely be shifted (i.e.
the pre-shift vegetation cover and land use) and the long-term biomass carbon
stock under the baseline cropping system.

For BCLA biomass carbon stocks according to IPCC (2019)18 or applicable local
literature values are compared to the respective stocks under the baseline
cropping system. All other parameters are calculated according to the
approaches described in this methodology, taking into account the situation in
the leakage area (i.e. use of appropriate parameters for different soils or
management practices).

12. Double Counting and Benefits Overlap

18 IPCC 2019, Vol 4 AFOLU, table 4.7 (forests), table 4.8 (plantations), chapter 5.2.1 (cropland),
chapter 6.2.1 (grassland).
                                                                                                                                     34

Refer to the GHG Emissions Reductions & Sequestration Product Requirements
Annex A "Double Counting Requirements" for cross-market or cross-project
double counting rules. In addition, this section outlines rules to avoid double
counting of benefits within a project (benefits overlap), e.g. due to
implementation of multiple SOC activities applying multiple SOC Activity
Modules.

Benefits overlap from SOC increase from multiple SOC activities would occur
when impacts of activities are not cumulative yet calculated through
independent approaches (e.g. with separate models or even separate
approaches under the SOC Framework Methodology). To avoid such effects, the
following rules shall be followed when applying multiple Activity Modules in one
project under the Framework Methodology:

12.1 Project applying direct measurement (Approach 1 under the
         Framework Methodology) in at least one activity module applied

For strata with measured SOC impacts, the resulting difference represents
impacts of all project activities, i.e. no additional model calculations for SOC
increase shall be done.

For strata without measurements (i.e. where only SOC Activity Modules without
direct measurement are applied), rules in section 12.2 (below) apply.

12.2 Projects applying SOC models or reference data (Approach 2 or 3
         under the Framework Methodology) without direct measurements

If SOC pools impacted can be clearly separated between activities, either
through chemical or physical differentiation in the soil (i.e. different soil organic
components impacted) or due to geographical separation (i.e. impact in different
strata), separate models or approaches may be applied to calculate cumulative
impact.

If SOC pools impacted cannot be separated and cumulative impact cannot be
proven (e.g. from published research comparing impacts in a combined study
including interactions between activities), only benefits from one activity shall be
accounted for. It is recommended that a direct measurement approach is
implemented in such cases to provide evidence of cumulated impact.

13. Project Buffer

According to GHG Emissions Reduction & Sequestration Product Requirements, a
fixed percentage of the validated and verified GS VERs must be transferred into
the Gold Standard Compliance Buffer if the SOC activity results in sequestration
(buffer is not required for emission reduction activities). The buffer is non-
refundable, though the project owner may transfer GS VERs from other Gold
                                                                                                                                     35

Standard certified projects to the Gold Standard Compliance Buffer in lieu of the
GS VERs from the project.

14. Additionality

All GS projects shall demonstrate that they would not have been implemented
without the benefits of carbon certification. Specific rules and guidelines on how
to assess additionality can be found in the Additionality section LUF Activity
Requirements and the AGR Additionality (AGR projects) Template.

15. Sustainable Development Goals

Primary SDG targeted by this Framework Methodology is SDG 13, through
avoidance of emissions as well as sequestration of carbon in the soil.
Contribution to further specific Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is not
defined here as it is specified at the project level following Principles &
Requirements.

16. Monitoring

16.1 Monitoring frequency and performance reviews
The project proponent shall submit a monitoring report at each verification and
performance review according to Principles & Requirements.

In addition, the project proponent shall submit an annual report containing at
least the information listed in Principles & Requirements using the Annual Report
Template, and those labelled as annually in below monitoring tables.

The project proponent shall also collect and document evidence that the
methodology's applicability conditions are met at all times. The project
proponent shall:

    · Electronically archive all monitoring data collected in the last crediting
         period for up to 2 years after the crediting period comes to an end; and

    · Ensure that measuring equipment is certified to national or international
         standards and calibrated according to the national standards and
         reference points or international standards and recalibrated at appropriate
         intervals according to manufacturer specifications.

16.2 Assessment of data and model applicability
At the time of Validation, the project owner shall document applicability of
parameters and models used in Approach 2 or Approach 3 based on field
                                                                                                                                     36

assessments. For each stratum, a representative number of small temporary soil
pits (area of 50 by 50 cm) shall be dug to a depth of 50 cm. The resulting soil
profiles are assessed regarding the following criteria:

    1. Soil type and soil depth: Verify that the soil type and depth match data
         source's conditions.

    2. Inorganic soil contents (rock, sand, clay etc.): Verify that portion of
         inorganic soil contents, match the data source's conditions. Especially
         increased presence of rocks or rock aggregates may require conservative
         adaptation of literature data and models (reduction of active soil
         components, density corrections, etc.).

    3. Organic matter: Assess the presence of (pre-project) organic matter such
         as large diameter root residues (indicating e.g. previous woody crops or
         plantation use). If such residues are present, the project's pre-project soil
         carbon stock may be considerably higher than a C-depleted soil. The
         resulting reduction of potential SOC increase may require model
         adaptation or exclusion of areas from project.

    4. Evidence for land management history: Assess soil structure for evidence
         of previous land management (e.g. tillage intensity and depth). Soil
         structure (e.g. upper soil horizons, porosity/compaction, disturbance
         depth, etc.) shall be in line with historic land management and literature
         source's practices.

The number of pits used for this assessment shall represent the project situation
and distributed across the defined strata. In heterogeneous areas , e.g. with
highly varying soils, land use history (e.g. fragmented historic deforestation)
and/or management activities, the number of samples will have to be large
enough to represent the variation and confirm the stratification.

The soil pits shall remain open until after the project initial certification audit.
The VVB shall assess the adequacy of the sampling to confirm applicability of
selected approaches and shall revisit a series of soil pits to verify the project
owner's assessment. If applicability of selected approaches is in doubt,
measurement of SOC in a sub-sample at this time is recommended.

The assessments described above are explicitly also required for projects
claiming retrospective crediting. Despite the project activities having already
taken place at initial certification, the above criteria will indicate applicability and
adequacy of data/model choice.

16.3 Data and Parameters collected for baseline calculation and when
         project areas (farms/land parcels) are being added and at
         renewable of crediting period if required

The following baseline information on each project area (i.e. farm/land parcel)
within the project region shall be recorded for any SOC Activity Module and
project:
                                                                                   37

· Unique numerical identifier for each project area (i.e. farm/land parcel)
· Name of farm/land owner
· Physical address and GPS coordinates of locations
· A statement clarifying the ownership of emission reductions

Data/parameter:       A
                      ha
Unit                  Total project area
Description           Project owner records
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Project start
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       Ay
                      ha
Unit                  Area per stratum y
Description           Project owner records
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Project start
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       AQBL,ET,a
Unit                  kg
Description           Agrochemical quantity applied by emitter type for baseline
                      activities
Source of data        Project owner records (5year pre-project average current)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Annually
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       CYBL
Unit
Description           Kg/ha
                      Average annual crop yield per ha in the project area during
Source of data        the baseline period (5 year average)
                      Project owner records (self-reporting e.g. sale receipts,
Value(s) applied      contracts, etc.)
                                                                                    38

Measurement           Yield is recorded annually and an average annual yield
procedures            calculated across the 5-year baseline period
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures      Annually
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       SOCBL,y
Unit                  tC/ha
Description           Soil organic carbon density at equilibrium per stratum y
Source of data        Project owner records (approach 1), from literature
                      (approach 2) or modelled (approach 3)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       SOCREF,y
Unit                  tC/ha
Description           Soil organic carbon reference density (under natural
                      vegetation) at equilibrium per stratum y
Source of data        values from literature / local studies
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start
procedures
Monitoring frequency   Used in approach 3 only
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       EFLE
Unit                  [tCO2e kgN-1]
Description           Conversion factor for emissions from N fertilizer
Source of data        IPCC defaults
Value(s) applied       Aggregated default value for EFFE is 0.01. Disaggregated
                      default values in IPCC 2019 Table 11.1 may be used if
Measurement           fertilizer inputs are known per fertilizer type.
procedures
Monitoring frequency  Project start
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   Used for calculations of emissions from increased fertilizer
                      use only. Not to be used under the SOC Framework
                      Methodology for emission reductions

Data/parameter:       FLU,y
Unit                  [dimensionless]
                                                                                  39

Description           land use factor in stratum y
Source of data        IPCC defaults or national / local studies (preferred)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FI,BL,y
Unit                  [dimensionless]
Description           input factor before project start in stratum y
Source of data        IPCC defaults or national / local studies (preferred)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FEBL
                      kg
Unit                  mean annual N fertilizer input under the baseline scenario
Description           Project owner records (5year pre-project average)
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Project start, if applicable
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FULBL,MT
Unit                  litres
Description           Fossil fuel consumed recorded by vehicle and fuel type for
                      baseline activities
Source of data        Project owner records or modelling (5year pre-project
                      average)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start, if applicable
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       EUWBL,SE
Unit                  kWh
                                                                               40

Description           electricity consumed by source for baseline activities
Source of data        Project owner records (5year pre-project average)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start, if applicable
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

In addition to the parameters listed above, the SOC Activity Modules may specify
additional monitoring parameters depending on activity and calculation
approach.

16.4 Data and Parameters monitored

Data/parameter:       A
                      ha
Unit                  Total project area
Description           Project owner records
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Annually
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       Ay
                      ha
Unit                  Area per stratum y
Description           Project owner records
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Annually
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       AQPR,ET,a
                      kg
Unit                  Agrochemical quantity by emitter type applied in year a
Description           Project owner records (current)
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Annually
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
                                                                                    41

Additional comments

Data/parameter:       CYt
Unit                  Kg/ha
Description           Average annual crop yield per ha in the project area (5 year
                      average)
Source of data        Project owner records (current)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Yield is recorded annually and an average annual yield
procedures            calculated at the end of each 5-year reporting period
Monitoring frequency  Annually
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments   This value shall be reported as evidence that no yield
                      reduction is taking place.
                      The lowest annual yield is considered CYmin and serve as
                      threshold to assess yield reduction (see Equation 19)

Data/parameter:       SOCt,y
Unit                  tC/ha
Description           Soil organic carbon density at equilibrium per stratum y
Source of data        Project owner records (approach 1), from literature
                      (approach 2) or modelled (approach 3)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           At each performance certification
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       SOCREF,y
Unit                  tC/ha
Description           Soil organic carbon reference density (under natural
                      vegetation) at equilibrium per stratum y
Source of data        Same as in baseline
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Project start
procedures
Monitoring frequency  Used in approach 3 only
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FLU,y
Unit                  [dimensionless]
Description           land use factor in stratum y
Source of data        Same as in baseline
Value(s) applied
                                                                               42

Measurement           Project start
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FI,PR,y
Unit                  [dimensionless]
Description           input factor before project start in stratum y
Source of data        IPCC defaults or national / local studies (preferred)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Annually
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FEPR,a
                      kg
Unit                  N fertilizer input under the project scenario in year a
Description           Project owner records (current)
Source of data
Value(s) applied      Annually, if applicable
Measurement
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       FULPR,MT,a
Unit                  litres
Description           Fossil fuel consumed
                      recorded by vehicle and fuel type in year a
Source of data        Project owner records (current)
Value(s) applied
Measurement           Annually, if applicable
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

Data/parameter:       EUWPR,SE,a
Unit                  kWh
Description           electricity consumed by source in year a
Source of data        Project owner records (current)
Value(s) applied
                                               43

Measurement           Annually, if applicable
procedures
Monitoring frequency
QA/QC procedures
Additional comments

In addition to the parameters listed above, the SOC Activity Modules may specify
additional monitoring parameters depending on SOC activity and calculation
approach.
                                                         44

Annex 1: Eligible Soil Sampling Protocols

The soil sampling protocols listed in Table 6 have been accepted for use under
this Framework Methodology. Additional sampling protocols may be submitted to
Gold Standard for addition to this list, subject to review and acceptance by Gold
Standard.
Table 6: List of eligible Soil Sampling Protocols

Protocol  Reference                                      Source
Name                                                     (accessed 09/2019)
ICRAF     Aynekulu, E. Vagen, T-G., Shephard, K.,
protocol  Winowiecki, L. 2011. A protocol for modeling,  http://old.worldagrof
          measurement and monitoring soil carbon         orestry.org/download
VCS SOC   stocks in agricultural landscapes. Version     s/Publications/PDFS/T
Module    1.1. World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF),        M11192.pdf
          Nairobi.
          Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) 2011.           https://verra.org/met
          Module VMD0021 Estimation of Stock in the      hodology/vmd0021-
          Soil Carbon Pool (Version 1.0).                estimation-of-stocks-
                                                         in-the-soil-carbon-
                                                         pool-v1-0/
                                                                                                                                     45

Annex 2: Additional References

In addition to the references listed in section Error! Reference source not
found., the following sources were referred for the development of this
methodology.

Aynekulu et al. (2011): A protocol for modeling, measurement and monitoring
         soil carbon stocks in agricultural landscapes, version 1.1. World
         Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi.
         (http://old.worldagroforestry.org/downloads/Publications/PDFS/TM11192.
         pdf)

Bikila, N. G., Tessema, Z. K., & Abule, E. G. (2016). Carbon sequestration
         potentials of semi-arid rangelands under traditional management practices
         in Borana, Southern Ethiopia. Agriculture, Ecosystems &
         Environment, 223, 108-114.

Cheesman, S., Thierfelder, C., Eash, N. S., Kassie, G. T., & Frossard, E. (2016).
         Soil carbon stocks in conservation agriculture systems of Southern
         Africa. Soil and Tillage Research, 156, 99-109.

European Soil Data Centre (2014): Soil data and information systems
         (http://eusoils.jrc.ec.europa.eu/). Also contains information on non-
         European soils.

FAO (2015): World reference base for soil resources 2014 International soil
         classification system for naming soils and creating legends for soil maps -
         Update 2015 (http://www.fao.org/3/i3794en/I3794en.pdf and
         http://www.fao.org/soils-portal/soil-survey/soil-classification/world-
         reference-base/en/)

Govaerts, B., Verhulst, N., Castellanos-Navarrete, A., Sayre, K. D., Dixon, J., &
         Dendooven, L. (2009). Conservation agriculture and soil carbon
         sequestration: between myth and farmer reality. Critical Reviews in Plant
         Science, 28(3), 97-122.

Hengl et al (2014): SoilGrids1km -- Global Soil Information Based on Automated
         Mapping. PLOS ONE, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105992
         (http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone
         .0105992).

Hoyle, F. C., D'Antuono, M., Overheu, T., & Murphy, D. V. (2014). Capacity for
         increasing soil organic carbon stocks in dryland agricultural systems. Soil
         Research, 51(8), 657-667.
                                                                                                                                     46

IPCC (2006): Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Volume 4
         Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (http://www.ipcc-
         nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/vol4.html).

IPCC (2019): 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
         Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Volume 4 Agriculture, Forestry and Other
         Land Use (https://www.ipcc-
         nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/pdf/19R_V4_advance.zip).

ISRIC (2014): World Soil Information (https://www.isric.org/explore). Several
         global soil maps are available, e.g. 1 km soil grids (http://soilgrids.org/).

Palm, C., Blanco-Canqui, H., DeClerck, F., Gatere, L., & Grace, P. (2014).
         Conservation agriculture and ecosystem services: An
         overview. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 187, 87-105.

Plaza-Bonilla, D., Arrúe, J. L., Cantero-Martínez, C., Fanlo, R., Iglesias, A., &
         Álvaro-Fuentes, J. (2015). Carbon management in dryland agricultural
         systems. A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 35(4), 1319-
         1334.

Smith, P., Soussana, J. F., Angers, D., Schipper, L., Chenu, C., Rasse, D. P., &
         Arias-Navarro, C. (2019). How to measure, report and verify soil carbon
         change to realise the potential of soil carbon sequestration for
         atmospheric greenhouse gas removal. Global change biology.

VCS Methodology VM0017 v 1.0 (2011): Adoption of Sustainable Agricultural
         Land Management. Developed by BioCarbon Fund, World Bank.
         (https://verra.org/methodology/vm0017-adoption-of-sustainable-
         agricultural-land-management-v1-0/)

VCS Module VMD0021 v1.0 (2011): Module VMD0021 Estimation of Stock in the
         Soil Carbon Pool. (https://verra.org/methodology/vmd0021-estimation-of-
         stocks-in-the-soil-carbon-pool-v1-0/)
