RPreogcisetsras tion and Issuance Thihsttipssn:/o/vtethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is at:

4 October 2023  v4.4
 ABOUT VERRA

  t: Verra sets the world's leading standards for climate action and sustainable development. We build
  is a standards for activities as diverse as reducing deforestation, to improving agricultural practices, to
  n addressing plastic waste, and to achieving gender equality. We manage programs to certify that these
  rsio activities achieve measurable high-integrity outcomes. And we work with governments, businesses, and
  ve civil society to advance the use of these standards, including through the development of markets.
  nt Everything we do is in service of increasingly ambitious climate and sustainable development goals ­
  urre /. and an accelerated transition to a sustainable future.
  e c tails Verra's certification programs include the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) Program and its Jurisdictional
  Th de and Nested REDD+ (JNR) framework, the Climate, Community & Biodiversity Standards (CCBS)
  nt. m- Program, the Sustainable Development Verified Impact Standard (SD VISta) Program, and the Plastic
  e ra Waste Reduction Program.
  docucms-prog Intellectual Property Rights, Copyright, and Disclaimer
  gram rd/v The intellectual property rights of all materials in this document are owned by Verra or by entities that
  ro da have consented to their inclusion in this document.
  S P stan The use of these materials in the establishment or operation of a project in a Verra certification
  VC on- program is permissible ("Authorized Use"). All other commercial use of these materials is prohibited.
  is rb Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, viewing, downloading, modifying, copying, distributing,
  f th -ca transmitting, storing, reproducing, or otherwise using, publishing, licensing, transferring, selling, or
  ion o ified creating derivative works (in whatever format) from this document or any information obtained from this
  s r document other than for the Authorized Use or for personal, academic, or other non-commercial
  er /ve purposes is prohibited.
  ent v ams All copyright and other proprietary notices contained in this document must be retained on any copies
  urr ogr made under the Authorized Use. All other rights of the copyright owner not expressly addressed above
  e c /pr are reserved.
  t th .org No representation, warranty, or guarantee express or implied is made in this document. No
  no rra representation, warranty, or guarantee express or implied is made that the information provided is
  is is ://ve accurate, current, or complete. While care is taken in the collection and provision of this information,
 h s Verra and its officers, employees, agents, advisers, and sponsors will not be liable for any errors,
T http omissions, misstatements, or mistakes in any information or damages resulting from the use of this

    information, or any decision made or action taken in reliance on this information.

    Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4
                                                                                                                      1 Introduction

 CONTENTS

   1 INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................ 2

  is at: 2 OPENING A VERRA REGISTRY ACCOUNT............................................................... 3
  ion 3 PIPELINE LISTING PROCESS...................................................................................... 4

    vers 3.1 Process.................................................................................................................................6
  rent 4 PROJECT REGISTRATION PROCESS ....................................................................... 10

    cur ils/. 4.1 Step 1: Project Validation and Verification ..................................................................10
    he eta 4.2 Step 2: Registration and Verification Approval ............................................................ 12
    t. T -d 4.3 Step 3: Project Review .....................................................................................................19
    en ram 4.4 Step 4: Project Registration and Initial VCU Issuance..................................................24
    cum rog 4.5 Step 5: Periodic VCU Issuance .......................................................................................26
    do cs-p 4.6 Step 6: VCU Retirements and Cancelations.................................................................28
    ram d/v 4.7 Step 7: Project Maintenance..........................................................................................29
  Prog ndar 5 AFOLU POOLED BUFFER ACCOUNT ...................................................................... 32
    CS -sta 5.1 Assignment of Buffer Credits at First Request for Issuance..........................................32
    V on 5.2 Assignment and Release of Buffer Credits at Subsequent Approved Verification

           this arb Requests ............................................................................................................................ 32
    of d-c 5.3 Cancelation and Holding of Buffer Credits ..................................................................33
  rsion erifie 6 QUALITY CONTROL OF REGISTERED PROJECTS .................................................... 37
    ve s/v 6.1 Process...............................................................................................................................37
  rrent gram 7 FURTHER INFORMATION ........................................................................................ 41
    e cu /pro 7.1 Communications Agreement.........................................................................................41
    th rg 7.2 Release and Accession of Project Proponents ............................................................41
    not ra.o 7.3 Comments Received Outside of a Public Comment Period .....................................42
  is is ://ver APPENDIX 1 ELIGIBILITY CONDITIONS FOR CONVERSION OF GHG CREDITS INTO
Th ttpsVCUS ...................................................................................................................... 43
  h GHG Credits issued to standalone projects, seeking conversion into VCUs ........................43

        GHG Credits issued to CDM CPAs, seeking conversion into VCUs ........................................ 44

   APPENDIX 2 DOCUMENT HISTORY .............................................................................. 46

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  1
                                                                                                                      1 Introduction

 1 INTRODUCTION

    This document outlines the procedures for listing pipeline projects, registering projects, and issuing
    verified carbon units (VCUs) under the VCS Program. This document is intended for use by project

  at: proponents, validation/verification bodies, VCU buyers, VCU sellers and any other entities participating
  is in the VCU market. Note that the VCS Standard and its related documents provide the rules and
  ion requirements for developing projects, and this document (the Registration and Issuance Process)
  rs should not be used for such purpose.
  t ve Projects may have one or many project proponents, though to aid readability, this document uses
  ren project proponent in the singular. For projects with multiple project proponents, project proponents
  cur ils/. should be substituted in place of project proponent, as appropriate.
  he eta Project proponents interact with the Verra Registry to list pipeline projects, register projects, and issue
  t. T -d VCUs (i.e., project pipeline listing, project registration and VCU issuance are handled by the Verra
  en ram Registry). Verra staff are responsible for undertaking a completeness check on documentation and for
  um og ensuring adherence to the VCS Program rules with respect to the pipeline listing process and the
  oc -pr project registration process. Verra staff also upload information to the Verra Registry.
  am d /vcs The Verra Registry provides the central repository for all information and documentation relating to
  ogr ard pipeline and registered projects. The registry is also responsible for ensuring uniqueness of projects,
  Pr nd issuing VCU serial numbers, and tracking VCU retirement. The registry makes project and VCU
  S sta information and documentation publicly available and can be accessed via the Verra website. As set
  VC n- out in the VCS Program Guide, Verra is responsible for reviewing project documentation and overseeing
  is rbo validation/verification bodies to ensure the integrity of projects and VCUs in the Verra Registry.
  of th d-ca Project documents must be submitted in electronic format.
  sion rifie The operating language of the VCS Program is English. The project and program description, validation
  er /ve report, monitoring report, verification report and all other documentation (including all and any
  nt v ms appendices) required under the VCS Program must be in English.
  urre gra This document will be updated from time-to-time, and readers shall ensure that they are using the most
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.corg/pro current version of the document.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  2
                                         2 Opening a Verra Registry Account

2 OPENING A VERRA REGISTRY

ACCOUNT is at: A Verra Registry account shall be opened by any market participant who wants to list a pipeline project,

ion register a project and/or issue, trade or retire VCUs as set out in Diagram 1.
vers Diagram 1: Opening a Verra Registry Account

   curreinlst/. Market participant completes an account
     he eta application with the Verra Registry
am do/cvucms-epnrot.gTram-d Verra reviews account application
this VCarSboPnr-osgtar ndard Verra notifies market participant of
      f -c account approval
versiosn/voerified 2.1.1 The Verra Registry is managed and operated by Verra staff. Further details about the Verra
      ent am Registry are available in the VCS Program Guide.
not thrrea.courrgr/progr 2.1.2
A market participant can apply to open a Verra Registry account at any time. For example, a
would-be project proponent does not need to have a validated or verified project and a would-
be VCU buyer does not need to have entered into a legal agreement to purchase VCUs in order
to open a Verra Registry account.
  is is ://ve 2.1.3 Market participants can apply to open a Verra Registry account through the Verra website.
Th ttps Market participants are also encouraged to contact the Verra Registry at any time at

  h registry@verra.org.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                              3
                                                                                                      3 Pipeline Listing Process

 3 PIPELINE LISTING PROCESS

    The Verra Registry includes a project pipeline which lists projects before they are registered. Projects

  at: may list on the pipeline in the early stages of development as under development or as under
  is validation when they are ready to begin the public consultation and validation process.
  sion Note that where a methodology element is put on hold or withdrawn, only projects that have been listed
  er on the project pipeline as either under development or under validation by the date on which the
  nt v methodology element is put on hold or withdrawn shall be granted the grace period for using the
  rre methodology element (i.e., any projects not listed on the project pipeline by such date shall not be
  cu ils/. granted the grace period). Project proponents may therefore wish to list their projects at the early
  he ta stages of project development to ensure that they can take advantage of any grace periods. See the
  t. T -de VCS Standard for more information on grace periods.
  en ram Diagram 2 below sets out the process for listing and the public comment period where a project initially
  cum rog requests to list on the pipeline as under development. Diagram 3 below, sets out the process for listing
  o -p on the pipeline and the public comment period where a project initially requests to list on the pipeline
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrd/vcs as under validation. Notes that follow the diagrams provide further details.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  4
                                                         3 Pipeline Listing Process

Diagram 2: Pipeline Listing Process ­ Under Development

Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is at:

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                  5
                                                        3 Pipeline Listing Process

Diagram 3: Pipeline Listing Process ­ Under Validation

VCSoPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is at: 3.1 Process
t versiosn/voefritfhieisd-carb 3.1.1
The only entities that may initiate the pipeline listing process are the project proponent, an
entity to which the project proponent has assigned sole right to the GHG emission reductions
(reductions) and carbon dioxide removals (removals) for the entire project crediting period, an
entity who has been authorized by the project proponent(s) to list the project on the project
pipeline or the authorized representative of any of these entities.
is is n:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrogram 3.1.2
To initiate the pipeline listing process, such entities shall submit the required documents for
listing to the Verra Registry and change the status of the project to pipeline listing requested.
Pipeline projects shall be listed as either under development or under validation. Projects
under development are those which have not yet contracted a validation/verification body to
perform validation. Projects under validation are those that have contracted a
validation/verification body to perform validation and are ready to begin the validation process.
Th ttps 3.1.3 To list a project as under development, such entities shall submit the following to the Verra
  h Registry:

A draft project description which shall include (at a minimum) the cover page and drafts of
Sections 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10, 1.11, 1.12, 1.14, 1.15, 1.16, 1.17,

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                      6
                                                                                                      3 Pipeline Listing Process

                   1.18, 3.1 and 3.2, of the VCS Project Description Template1, or the equivalent Sections in
                   the VCS Joint Project Description & Monitoring Report Template.
              Note - Indicative information is sufficient (e.g., the proposed approach for establishing project
              ownership, rather than the full rationale and evidence that will be submitted for validation).

           at: A listing representation.
  ion is 3.1.4 To list a project as under validation, the following shall be submitted to Verra:

        ers 1) A project description with all sections of the VCS Project Description Template or the VCS
           t v Joint Project Description & Monitoring Report Template completed.

        urren /. 2) Proof of contracting of the validation, provided in accordance with Section 4.2.11.
           e c tails A listing representation.

  t. Th -de 3.1.5 The project proponent shall pay the pipeline listing fee before Verra will process the listing
        n m request submission. Where the project listed as under development first, the fee will not be
        me gra required when the project subsequently requests to list the project as under validation.
        docu -pro Note ­ Pipeline projects may either apply an approved methodology or a methodology that is
        cs under development. Where a methodology under development is applied, the project
        am /v description shall provide a reference for the draft version of the methodology.

  Progr ndard 3.1.6 Projects participating in multiple Verra programs (e.g. the VCS Program and the CCB Program)
        S ta may submit joint templates only if the project proponent is making concurrent requests under
        VC n-s the VCS Program and the other program(s).

  this arbo 3.1.7 The following applies with respect to the listing representation:
        ion of ified-c 1) The Verra website provides the template for the listing representation. The template shall
           r not be altered other than to fill in the project-specific details.
        vers s/ve 2) The listing representation shall be properly executed as a deed in accordance with
           nt m applicable local laws and the organization's own constitutional documents (e.g., signature
           rre gra by directors and requirement of company seals).
        e cu /pro 3) Where more than one individual or organization can claim rights in respect of the execution
          th rg of the listing representation, and there exists no other (single) entity which may execute the
       ot a.o listing representation, all such individuals and organizations shall execute the listing

    is n errrepresentation, using the appropriate template available on the Verra website for pipeline
  is ://v projects with multiple project proponents, as applicable. Note that such representations
Thhttps may be executed in any necessary number of counterparts.

    3.1.8 All project documents shall be submitted to the Verra Registry in electronic format.

1 Section numbers are based on the VCS Project Description Template, v4.3

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                    7
                                                                                                      3 Pipeline Listing Process

    3.1.9 Where a project proponent requests to list a project as under development, Verra conducts a
              completeness review of the submitted project documents to ensure that:

              1) The relevant sections of the VCS Project Description Template have been completed in
                   accordance with Sections 3.1.1.

        at: 2) The listing representation has been signed by the relevant responsible parties.
        n is Any issues raised as a result of the Verra completeness review shall be addressed before the
        sio project listing request can proceed.
  t ver 3.1.10 Where a project is requesting to list as, or update its status to under validation, Verra reviews
        en the submitted project documents to ensure that sufficient information is present for the project
        urr /. to undergo public comment. Any issues raised as a result of the Verra review shall be
        e c tails addressed before the project can proceed to public comment.
  t. Th -de 3.1.11 The project proponent uploads all relevant documents to the Verra Registry. The project
        en am proponent shall use all the information from the project documents to create the project record
        m gr in the Verra Registry. The status of the project is set to under development or under validation,
        ocu pro as appropriate. All documents submitted are posted publicly, except for commercially sensitive
        d cs- information and proof of contracting.
  gram rd/v 3.1.12 For projects listed initially as under development, the project status shall be updated to under
        ro da validation by submitting the required documentation set out in Section 3.1.4 (noting that a
        S P tan second listing representation is not required) in order to undergo public comment, as set out in
        C -s Sections 3.1.13 ­3.1.14, below. Verra undertakes the relevant checks set out in Section 3.1.9.
  is V rbon 3.1.13 Projects shall undergo a 30-day public comment period. The public comment period starts on
        f th -ca the date on which the project status is updated to under validation or the date on which the
        ion o ified project is listed on the pipeline as under validation.
  ers /ver 3.1.14 Any comments shall be submitted through the project's page on the Verra Registry.
        v s Respondents shall provide their name, organization, country, and email address. At the end of
        ent am the public comment period, Verra provides all comments received to the project proponent.
        urr ogr Verra posts a public summary of all comments received during the public comment period. The
        e c /pr project proponent shall address such comments as set out in the VCS Standard.
  t th .org 3.1.15 Verra stores the electronic and signed original project documents in its record-keeping system
      no rra for a minimum period of 12 years from the date the project is listed on the project pipeline.
  is is ://ve 3.1.16 Where a pipeline project successfully completes validation, it may progress to project
Thhttps registration on the Verra Registry, following the procedures set out in Section 4.

    3.1.17 Where a pipeline project does not successfully complete validation within the timeframes
              specified in the VCS Standard, Verra changes the project status to inactive. Inactive projects
              that were most recently listed as under development shall request listing as under validation to
              be reactivated. Inactive projects that were most recently listed as under validation shall request

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  8
                                                                                                      3 Pipeline Listing Process

              registration in order to reactivate. Inactive projects shall apply the latest version of the
              applicable methodology and VCS Program rules when reactivating.
    3.1.18 Where Verra has reason to believe that false or misleading project information has been
              submitted, Verra seeks clarification from the project proponent. Where the project proponent

        at: cannot satisfactorily justify the information provided for the pipeline project, Verra reserves the
        is right to delist the project.
  sion 3.1.19 Where Verra deems the pipeline listing request is vexatious, frivolous, or an abuse of process,
        er Verra may reject the project without providing findings to the project.
  ent v 3.1.20 Where Verra deems, at any point during the pipeline listing request process, that the project
        urr /. does not clearly demonstrate conformance with the VCS Program rules, Verra communicates
        c ils the issue(s) to the project proponent and stops the review process. The project proponent may
        he eta submit updated documentation addressing the issue(s) and request that Verra resumes the
        t. T -d review. Where the project proponent fails to address the issue(s) within 12 months of such
        en ram communication the project status is changed to inactive (see 3.1.17).
  ocum prog 3.1.21 Where Verra determines, at any point during the pipeline listing request process, that the
        d s- project does not conform with the VCS Program rules, Verra will:
        gram rd/vc 1) Reject the project.
        Pro nda 2) Change the status of the project to rejected by administrator.
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSbon-sta 3) Make the project page public and include information on the reason for rejection.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  9
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

 4 PROJECT REGISTRATION PROCESS

    The following steps are required under the VCS Program to register a project and issue VCUs, and these

  at: are presented in detail in this Section 4:
        n is 1) Project validation and verification
        rsio 2) Registration and verification approval request
        t ve 3) Project review
        urren /. 4) Project registration and initial VCU issuance
        e c tails 5) Periodic VCU issuance
        t. Th -de 6) VCU retirements and cancelations
        en ram 7) Project maintenance

  cum rog For the purposes of this document, the project registration process refers to all or any of these six
  do s-p steps, as the case may be. The entity that initiates the project registration process may terminate the
  am /vc process at any one of these steps if it decides it does not want to register the project or have VCUs
  gr rd issued.
  CS Pr-ostanda 4.1 Step 1: Project Validation and Verification
  is V rbon The project shall be validated, and the GHG emission reductions or carbon dioxide removals verified as
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhied-ca set out in Diagram 4 below.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  10
                                                                                           4 Project Registration Process
Diagram 4: Validation of Project and Verification of Reductions or Removals

                                                                      Documents include:

Project proponent submits documentation

    t: to validation/verification body
  nt version is a Validation/verification body assesses

        re project for validation
                                                                      1) Project description
                                                                      2) Evidence of project ownership
                                                                      3) Other, as required by VVB

 ent. Trahme -cduertails/. Validation/verification body provides
cum rog project proponent with validation report

   o -p and validation representation
S Prosgtaranmdadrd/vcs Project proponent submits documentation
    VC on- to validation/verification body
ersion/voefritfhieisd-carb Validation/verification body assesses GHG  Documents include:
  v s emission reductions or removals for                             1) Monitoring report
            nt m verification                                         2) Other, as required by VVB

       ot thea.courrgr/eprogra Validation/verification body provides
    is n rr verification report and verification
Thihsttps://ve representation

4.1.1 The requirements for validation and verification, including the requirements for validation/

verification bodies, are set out in the VCS Standard and the VCS Program Guide. Projects shall

complete validation prior to requesting registration and complete verification prior to

requesting verification approval. The process for requesting registration and verification

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                 11
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

              approval, including the documents required to be submitted for each type of request, are set
              out in Section 4.2 below.
    4.1.2 Where a verification period includes more than one calendar year, the Verra Registry will
              display separate vintages for each calendar year within one verification period.

  at: Note ­ For AFOLU ARR and IFM projects with harvesting, if any year within the verification period has a
  is negative number of reductions or removals, zero VCUs will be issued for that year and a net total
  ion amount of VCUs will be issued in the next year that sufficient reductions and removals are achieved to
  rs compensate for the negative year(s).
   nt ve Box 1. Example of VCU issuance in separate vintages
   curreils/. For example, where the verification period is 1 January 2020 to 30 June 2021, the project proponent would
   e ta have one VCU issuance record for the 2020 VCUs and a separate VCU issuance record for the 2021 VCUs.
   Th e The VCUs assigned each vintage would be based on the breakdown of reductions and removals in the
   t. -d monitoring report. The two vintages would be 1 January 2020 ­ 31 December 2020 and 1 January 2021 ­ 30
   en ram June 2021.
  docucms-prog 4.2 Step 2: Registration and Verification Approval
  gram rd/v The project is presented to the Verra Registry for registration and verification approval as set out in
  ro da Diagram 5 below.
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPn-stan Diagram 5: Project Registration Request

    4.2.1 The only entities that may initiate the project registration process are the project proponent, an
              entity to which the project proponent has assigned sole right to the reductions or removals for

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  12
                                         4 Project Registration Process

              the entire project crediting period, or the authorized representative of either of these entities.
              No other entity can initiate the project registration process.

    4.2.2 Registration of a project may be requested when the project has completed project validation
              but before the first verification of reductions or removals.

  at: 4.2.3 Where the project is presented for registration without verification approval, the relevant
        n is documents that shall be provided to the Verra Registry are:
        rsio 1) The project description and registration representation.
        t ve 2) The validation report and the validation representation.
        urren /. 3) The non permanence risk report, if applicable
        e c tails 4) Emission reduction and removal calculation spreadsheets.
        t. Th -de 5) Proof of right or proof of contracting, where relevant.
        en ram 6) Any annexes or supporting documents referenced in the project description.

  cum rog 4.2.4 Where the project is presented for verification approval, the relevant documents that should be
        do s-p provided to the Verra Registry are:
        ram d/vc 1) The monitoring report and the issuance representation.
        Prog ndar 2) The verification report and the verification representation.
        CS -sta 3) The non permanence risk report, if applicable
        is V bon 4) The emission reduction and removal calculation spreadsheets.
        f th -car 5) Any annexes or supporting documents referenced in project documentation.
        ion orified 6) Proof of right or proof of contracting, where relevant.
        vers s/ve 7) Evidence and representation with respect to the cancelation of GHG credits under another
           nt m GHG program.

  urre ogra 4.2.5 Where the project proponent requests registration and verification approval together, the
        e c /pr relevant documents that shall be provided to the Verra Registry are:
        t th .org 1) The project description and registration representation.

    is no erra 2) The validation report and the validation representation.
 his s://v3) The non permanence risk report, if applicable
T http 4) The monitoring report and the issuance representation.

              5) The verification report and the verification representation.
              6) The emission reduction and removal calculation spreadsheets.
              7) Any annexes or supporting documents referenced in project documentation.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  13
                                                                            4 Project Registration Process

8) Proof of right or proof of contracting, where relevant.

9) Evidence and representation with respect to the cancelation of GHG credits under another
     GHG program.

4.2.6 Where the project proponent reassesses the project baseline as part of a verification approval

      at: request, in addition to the documents listed in Section 4.2.4, the relevant documents that shall
      is be provided to the Verra Registry are:
sion 1) An updated project description that includes updated Sections 1.14, 1.15, 1.16, 3.1, 3.2,
   ver 3.4, 4.1 ­ 4.4, 5.12 to reflect any changes as required in accordance with baseline
   nt reassessment requirements set out in the VCS Standard, and any updates to the baseline
   urre /. emissions quantifications.
e c tails 2) A verification report that includes an assessment of the baseline reassessment in Section
   Th e 3.4.
ogramadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gram-d 4.2.7
All documents submitted to Verra as part of the request, comments received, and documents
Verra issues as part of project request will be public, except for commercially sensitive
information and proof of contracting. Where a project document contains commercially
sensitive information, the project proponent may submit a public and a private version of the
document. The information in the private document shall meet the definition of "Commercially
Sensitive Information" in the VCS Program Definitions.
S Pr tand 4.2.8 Projects participating in multiple Verra programs (e.g., the VCS Program and the CCB Program)
      C -s may submit joint templates only if the project proponent is making concurrent requests under
      V on the VCS Program and the other program(s).
ersion/voefritfhieisd-carb 4.2.9
Where a project description deviation has been applied, and a revised project description is
issued, such project description shall be provided to the Verra Registry. Likewise, where a
project crediting period has been renewed, the revised project description and new validation
report and validation representation shall be provided to the Verra Registry.
ent v ams 4.2.10 The following shall apply with respect to the project proponent representations:
curr rogr 1) The Verra website provides the templates for the registration representation, issuance
 the g/p representation and all other project proponent representations. The templates shall not be
t .or altered other than to fill in the project specific details.
    is no rra 2) The project proponent representations shall be properly executed as deeds in accordance
  is ://ve with applicable local laws and the organization's own constitutional documents (e.g.,
Th ttps signature by directors, requirement of company seals).
  h 3) Where more than one individual or organization can claim rights in respect of the execution

of the project proponent representations, all such individuals and organizations shall

2 Section numbers are based on the VCS Project Description Template, v4.3.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                            14
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

                   execute the project proponent representations, using the appropriate templates available
                   on the Verra website for projects with multiple project proponents, as applicable. Note that
                   such representations may be executed in any necessary number of counterparts.
    4.2.11 Proof of contracting shall be provided to the Verra Registry where required, as set out in

        t: Section 3.1.4. The project proponent or its authorized representative shall provide evidence of
        is a the legal agreement between the project proponent (or other entity that has contracted the
        n validation/verification body to undertake validation) and the validation/verification body, in
        rsio relation to validation of the project. A final legal agreement, letter of intent, memorandum of
        ve understanding or term sheet shall serve as proof of contracting. Such evidence of proof of
        nt contracting shall be uploaded to the Verra Registry as a private document (for Verra internal
        urre /. auditing purposes) and therefore will not be publicly available.
  e c tails 4.2.12 There is no need to submit proof of right to the Verra Registry where the project proponent or
        Th de its authorized representative is initiating the project registration process. Proof of right shall be
        nt. m- submitted to the Verra Registry where an entity other than the project proponent or its
        e ra authorized representative is initiating the project registration process. Evidencing proof of right
        cum rog is as set out below.
  do cs-p 4.2.13 The entity initiating the project registration process or its authorized representative shall
        ram d/v submit to the Verra Registry the legal agreement(s) transferring the right to the reductions or
        og ar removals for the entire project crediting period to it from the project proponent. Where there
        S Pr tand are one or more intermediaries standing between the entity initiating the project registration
        C -s process and the project proponent, Verra checks all the legal agreements documenting the
        V on complete chain of transfer of right to the reductions or removals to the entity from the project
        this arb proponent. Legal agreement(s) shall be in English or shall be an official translation of the legal
        f -c agreement(s).
  ion orified 4.2.14 In consideration of confidentiality, the entirety of the aforementioned legal agreement(s) need
        ers /ve not be shown, but Verra undertakes the checks set out in Table 1 (if submitting an official
        t v s translation of the legal agreement(s), only such information needs to be translated and shown
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrogram to Verra).

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  15
                                                 4 Project Registration Process

Table 1: Evidence for Proof of Right

Information required  Verra Registry check

Names of the parties to the

rsion is at: agreement
                      The parties are the entity initiating the project registration
                      process (buyer or transferee) and the project proponent (seller
                      or transferor), or where there is one or more intermediaries, the
                      parties shall be the relevant parties in the chain of ownership
                      between project proponent and the entity initiating the project
                      registration process
urrent/v. e Date of the agreement
                      Appropriate to the project and transaction subject of the legal
                      agreement
he c etails Project name
                      Same as the project that the entity is presenting for registration
ment.gTram-d Project crediting period
                      The project crediting period is defined, with a start date and
                      duration (or end date) specified
docu s-pro Clause that transfers the
am /vc right to the GHG emission
r d reductions or carbon
og ar dioxide removals between
Pr nd the parties to the
S ta agreement
                      The clause transfers the right to the GHG emission reductions or
                      carbon dioxide removals generated by the project for the project
                      crediting period

is VC bon-s Signatures of parties to the The legal agreement is signed by both parties to the agreement
th ar legal agreement
  ersion/voefrified-c 4.2.15 The VCS Program allows projects registered under an approved GHG program (e.g., CDM) to
        t v s also register with the VCS Program. In such cases, the documentation required for the project
        ren ram registration process is the same as required for projects registering under the VCS Program
        cur rog only, but noting the following:
        the rg/p 1) The project description from the approved GHG program and a project description using the
       ot a.o VCS Project Description Template with the relevant sections complete, as set out in the

    is n errVCS Standard, shall be submitted.
 his ://v2) Where project proponents have received or are seeking credit for reductions and removals
T ttps from a project activity under the VCS Program, evidence requirements of no double
  h issuance as outlined in the VCS Standard shall apply. If the credits have been cancelled,

the project proponent or its authorized representative shall also sign and submit to the

Verra Registry a VCU conversion representation.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                  16
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

              3) AFOLU projects are subject to the rules and requirements for non-permanence risk analysis
                   and buffer withholding set out in Section 4.7.1. The buffer withholding percentage
                   determined by the AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool shall be applied to the proportion of
                   GHG credits to be issued under the VCS Program (only).

        t: 4) Where a loss event or a reversal occurs, the project shall conform with the VCS Program
           is a rules for reporting a loss event and holding and canceling credits set out in Section 5.3.
           n Such reporting, holding, and canceling shall apply to the proportion of credits (GHG credits
           rsio and buffer credits) granted to date under the VCS Program. For example, if 50 percent of
           ve the total credits (GHG credits and, where applicable, buffer credits) granted to the project
           nt to date have been granted under the VCS Program and a loss event results in a reversal of
           urre /. reductions or removals achieved to date (in relation to which credits have been issued and
           c ils buffered), buffer credits would be canceled to cover 50 percent of the reversal.

  The deta 4.2.16 Where the project is registered with both the VCS Program and the CDM, and where temporary
        nt. m- GHG credits have been issued to the project (i.e., temporary certified emission reductions
        e ra (tCERs) and long-term certified emission reductions (lCERs)) which have expired without having
        cum rog been sold or retired, such credits may be issued under the VCS Program in accordance with the
        do -p requirements in Section 4.2.18. Where temporary credits have expired, evidence of their
        am /vcs expiration shall be provided.

  ogr ard 4.2.17 The VCS Program also allows projects registered under a non-approved GHG program to also
        Pr nd register with the VCS Program. In such cases, the documentation required for the project
        S sta registration process is the same as required for projects registering under the VCS Program
        VC on- only. Where project proponents have received or are seeking credit for reductions and removals
        is rb from a project activity under the VCS Program and another GHG program, evidence
        f th -ca requirements of no double issuance as outlined in the VCS Standard shall apply.

  ion o ified 4.2.18 The VCS Program allows projects registered under an approved GHG program (e.g. CDM) to
        ers /ver cancel GHG credits issued under the approved GHG program and have them issued as VCUs in
        t v s the Verra Registry. Project activities shall be eligible under the VCS Program (i.e., included
        ren ram within the scope of the VCS Program, as set out in the VCS Standard) and meet the conditions
        ur og set out in Appendix 1 in order to be eligible for such conversion. In such cases, the following
        e c /pr applies:
        t th .org 1) An official notification or other evidence of cancelation of the GHG credits under the

      no rraapproved GHG program and a signed VCU conversion representation shall be provided to
  is is ://ve the Verra Registry.
Th ttps 2) Where the project is registered under the CDM, those documents required for project
  h registration and Certified Emission Reduction (CER) issuance under the CDM shall be

                   provided to the Verra Registry. Verra creates a project record on the Verra Registry, noting
                   that such record shall have the status credits transferred from other GHG program. Such
                   projects are not considered to be registered under the VCS Program and are not eligible for

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  17
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

                   verification under the VCS Program without first conforming with the procedures for
                   registration with the VCS Program and an approved GHG program set out in Section 4.2.15
              3) Where the project is registered under the Joint Implementation (JI) program, the project
                   shall also be registered with the VCS Program before Emission Reduction Units (ERUs) may

           t: be converted into VCUs.3 Following registration with the VCS Program, such projects shall
           is a provide those documents required for ERU issuance under the JI program to the Verra
           n Registry.
        rsio 4) Where the project is registered under the Climate Action Reserve (CAR), those documents
           t ve required for registration and Climate Reserve Tonne (CRT) issuance shall be provided to the
           en Verra Registry. Verra creates a project record on the Verra Registry, noting that such record
           urr /. shall have the status credits transferred from other GHG program. Such projects are not
           e c tails considered to be registered under the VCS Program and are not eligible for verification
           Th de under the VCS Program without first conforming with the procedures for registration with
           nt. m- the VCS Program and an approved GHG program set out in Section 4.2.15
        me gra 5) Where the project is an AFOLU project, the project shall also be registered with the VCS
           ocu pro Program before GHG credits issued under an approved GHG program may be converted
           d s- into VCUs. The buffer withholding percentage for such projects shall be applied to the
           am /vc number of GHG credits being converted.
  rogr dard 4.2.19 Where a project or project activity is seeking or planning to receive other forms of GHG credit
        S P tan and/or GHG-related environmental credit, evidence requirements of no double claiming as
        C -s outlined in the VCS Standard shall apply.
  is V rbon 4.2.20 For grouped projects and AFOLU projects with geographic areas characterized by one or more
        f th ca geodetic polygons, the project proponent shall provide the geodetic information to the Verra
        ion o ified- Registry in the format specified in the VCS Standard.
  rs er 4.2.21 For grouped projects, AFOLU projects, and other projects with risk of reversal or loss, the
        ve s/v project proponent shall submit monitoring and verification reports in chronological order.
  rent ram 4.2.22 The Verra website maintains information on validation/verification bodies, and Verra checks
        cur rog the following:
        the rg/p 1) The validation/verification body that conducted validation of the project was accredited for
       ot a.o the relevant sectoral scope for validation at the date(s) on which the validation report and
Thihsttipssn://verrvalidation representation were issued.

3 The flexibility inherent within the JI program (e.g., use of an approved methodology not required) means it is necessary for JI
projects to register with the VCS Program in order to determine whether ERUs issued to such projects are eligible for
conversion into VCUs.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  18
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

              2) The validation/verification body that conducted verification of the project was accredited
                   for the relevant sectoral scope for verification at the date(s) on which the verification report
                   and verification representation were issued.

    4.2.23 The Project Registration Request Review Fee shall be paid before Verra will process the project

        t: registration request.
  ion is a 4.3 Step 3: Project Review
  vers Verra reviews all project requests. Verra will not begin the project review until the request is submitted
  nt to the Verra Registry and Verra confirms all the relevant documents are complete. If all the relevant
  urre /. documents are not submitted or the documents are not complete, Verra contacts the project proponent
  c ils (or authorized representative) to identify the outstanding issues.
  The deta As part of the review, Verra may identify non-conformances within project documentation, called
  nt. m- findings. Verra approves the request when no non-conformances are identified. Where non-
  me gra conformances have been identified, the validation/verification body and the project proponent must
  cu ro address the findings before the request can be approved, resulting in another round of review.
  do cs-p The project review process does not replace the validation or verification; rather, it checks that the
  ram d/v validation/verification body has appropriately assessed and has fully described how it has assessed
  og ar the project's conformance with VCS Program rules. The project review process is set out in Diagram 6
  S Pr tand below.
  VC n-s When submitting a verification approval request, it is not necessary to immediately request issuance of
  is rbo VCUs. VCUs may be issued upon request to the Verra Registry after verification is approved.
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhied-ca Further details on the project review process are provided in this section.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  19
                                                                                           4 Project Registration Process
Diagram 6: Review of Project Registration and Verification Approval Request

Thi4Phs.rt3otips.j1esnc:/ot/WrPv1VvteRaer)hevotlerihiergdreVvarrreaweeaaieut,rmi.cfnorwVoianunderrd/eunrPrgvirrrlonreat/eeotapgsrinnfkcsirifaoeteoieacntssvgiarsdfeatesitrehiaaorrrseapsenmiptvvishoblaiseieeoenld/widddvpayoareomosttffrihjeoiepttfahtnhcaihtee/triotstvdphpdeor-reoVrofocilpfptojCaiehocrgrcoeaSnybtjt.eepidoWonPcroonntthrcj(r-eobeuoescormgrgtetdaiirestrynasentn,romvtadacsifouetaiitnpwtodorhydnd:ooiainn/orcsvgigrzsucsetevmhsdesaes-rreripeefpcinrpcrorooatarn.ejigtefsisToocerernathdmnpmertdaaeruont-qciprdcuviuoneeeerng)stwreataetinhtininshltedst(atp/ohpv.rrepoeirjtVreossCcvitSeodn. is at:

                   authorized representative) and provides a project review report detailing the findings as
                   part of the first review round.

              2) The validation/verification body shall address the findings in the project review report.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  20
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

    4.3.2 The validation/verification body shall respond to the findings in the project review report, as
              follows:
              1) Undertake, or ensure that the project proponent undertakes, and validate or verify (as
                   appropriate) revisions to the project documents where necessary,

        at: 2) Provide a written response to each finding, and
        is 3) Submit all revised documents to Verra including track change and clean versions.
  ion 4.3.3 Where the findings are addressed to the satisfaction of Verra, Verra approves the request and
        ers notifies the project proponent (or authorized representative) and validation/verification body.
  nt v 4.3.4 Where the findings are not addressed to the satisfaction of Verra, Verra may raise another
        urre /. review round to the validation verification body with the unresolved findings, up to three review
        c ils rounds.
        t. The -deta Note ­ For the purpose of determining adherence to deadlines with respect to methodology
        n m validity and completion of validation and verification, the dates of the project documents
        e ra submitted under the initial registration or verification approval request will be used (rather
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-prog than the dates of the revised documents).

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  21
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process
    Diagram 7: Review of Project Registration and Verification Approval Request

Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is at:

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  22
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

    Project Request Denial Process
    4.3.5 Verra may deny a project request at any point during the review process under the following:

              1) Where documentation is deemed incomplete, of unsatisfactory quality, or where immediate
                   non-conformances with the VCS Program rules are identified.

        is at: 2) The project proponent or validation/verification body significantly alters the project
           n documents outside the scope of the findings issued by Verra.

        rsio 3) Where findings are not satisfactorily closed after three rounds of review.
        t ve 4) No response is received from the validation/verification body within 60 days from the date

           ren the project review report was issued.
  cur ils/. 4.3.6 Where a request is denied:

        The deta 1) Verra notifies the project proponent and uploads the project review report (if applicable)
           nt. m- and a letter to the Verra Registry stating the reason that the request was denied.

        me gra 2) Verra changes the registry status to the relevant denial status (e.g., registration request
           ocu pro denied).

        am d /vcs- 3) A new request may be submitted after 90 days from the date of denial.
  ogr ard 4.3.7 To submit a new request the project proponent or its authorized representative must:

        S Pr tand 1) Email registry@verra.org, stating the project is submitting a new request following a denial.
        C -s 2) Submit all relevant project documents to the Verra Registry as set out in Sections 4.2.3,

           is V on 4.2.5, and 4.2.5 and a letter to detailing the steps taken to address the reasons for denial.
  f th -carb 4.3.8 Project proponents submitting a new registration request shall:

        ion o ified 1) Pay the Project Registration Request Review Fee, which shall be paid before Verra
           rs er processes the new request.

        nt ve ms/v 2) Submit the new request no later than one year from the date the request was denied.
           re ra Where the new request is not submitted within one year of denial, the project is rejected,
           cur rog and the status is changed to rejected by administrator.

  the rg/p 4.3.9 Where the findings are not addressed to the satisfaction of Verra after two denials at
       ot a.o registration request, the project is rejected and the status is changed to rejected by

    is n err administrator.
 his s://v 4.3.10 Project proponents shall submit a new crediting period renewal request within one year of
T http denial, or the status is changed to inactive. Where the findings are not addressed to the

              satisfaction of Verra after two denials of a crediting period renewal request, the project status
              is changed to inactive.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  23
                                         4 Project Registration Process

4.4 Step 4: Project Registration and Initial VCU Issuance

The project is registered and the VCUs are issued on the Verra Registry as set out in Diagram 8.

    Diagram 8: Project Registration and Initial VCU Issuance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   at:

Thi44hs..t44tips..21sn:/o/pWWvtrhheotheeprrrroeeean.cettohhnueertrgsppr/ehrrpooanrjjleetol ccuvgttperiilssaorsappmdirroeesassn/leevlnnodettofreeciddtfuhieffmioosdrre-nrrVceetCasggiirfssSobttrrlolaaPonttwiiroo-oinsnnggtwaartnaihntdhmedovarueedrtrqdiovfui/eccivrraueicftmmiisco-aenepntianrtospotn.pignarTropSahvpeamerclo,t-vcitdoahunlee,rstrtpahe4reio.nl2sjpte./3rcv.otaejepnrcrsdotip4oo.n2n.e7ins.t

shall upload all documents following the requirements in Sections 4.2.5 and 4.2.7.

4.4.3 The project's geodetic co-ordinates shall be entered onto the project record on the Verra
          Registry. The Verra Registry checks that there are no other projects within a five-kilometer

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                 24
                                         4 Project Registration Process

radius. Where there are projects within a five-kilometer radius. Verra confirms that the project

being presented for registration is unique and not one of the overlapping projects, noting that it

is possible to have two projects operated by the same project proponent at the same location

(they must be different activities described in separate project descriptions, with separate

t: validation and verification). Verra may do this on its own if sufficient information is available or
a by contacting the validation/verification body of the project being presented for registration
is who shall confirm that it is unique and not one of the overlapping projects. Where Verra is
ion unable to confirm uniqueness of the project, the project cannot be registered.
curreinlst/v. ers 4.4.4
VCUs can be issued incrementally from a verification report (i.e., when the project proponent or
its authorized representative requests VCU issuance, it can request issuance of part of the
verification report volume and request issuance of the remaining volume at a later date). The
following shall apply:
The deta 1) The entity requesting VCU issuance shall instruct the Verra Registry that it is requesting
   nt. m- VCU issuance for only part of the verification report volume and shall specify the volume for
   me gra which it is requesting VCU issuance.
ocu -pro 2) The VCU issuance levy and any fees charged by Verra are payable on the volume of VCUs
   d cs which are issued, not the total verification report volume.
gram rd/v 3) Verra does not specify thresholds or timeframes on incremental VCU issuance (e.g., the
   ro da total number of incremental VCU issuances that can be made from a verification report and
   S P tan the elapsed time between first and last VCU issuance from the verification report). Verra is
   VC n-s entitled to apply such thresholds and timeframes as it deems necessary.
is rbo 4) The Verra Registry displays the total verification report volume, the volume of VCUs issued
   f th -ca to date and the history of VCU issuances with respect to the verification report.
ion o ified 5) The entity requesting VCU issuance does not have to request VCU issuance of the total
   rs er verification report volume (i.e., it can choose to only request VCU issuance for a part of the
   ve s/v verification report volume and never request issuance of the remaining verification report
   ent am volume).
urr ogr 6) VCUs are not subject to any discounting with respect to their fungibility. VCU owners,
   e c /pr programs or other climate change efforts that accept VCUs may apply a discount at their

t th .org own discretion.
 no rra 4.4.5 Where the project has canceled GHG credits issued under an approved GHG program and is
 is is ://vehaving them issued as VCUs (as set out in Section 4.2.18), the project reference number under
h s the approved GHG program shall be noted on the project record on the Verra Registry.
T http 4.4.6 The VCU issuance levy shall be collected by Verra before VCUs are deposited into an account.

4.4.7 The VCS Program allows VCUs to be labeled to designate that the VCS project has met the
          requirements of another certification standard (certification labels), or that the VCUs are
          eligible or approved for use in a national, sectoral, or investor-specific market (market labels).

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                    25
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

              The Verra website provides the list of current VCU labels and the procedure for attaining such
              VCU labels.
    4.4.8 To have VCUs labeled, project proponents shall submit documentation to the Verra Registry

ThiDT4hshi.ta5teipgsrersan:mm/o/tvV1S2davyti9Ce))tynpetemStebhbraFoFa.peeorvegoonfalnieoinrrytss.c5hwtoaasptnaue:ru.eragamcraPgorteetriiniato/eeornhopctrdngnikerrefraieifrtovtocoolhte,cavgrfdaelrstaewVirtierfoiabtCirchaccinesfmUtiaicpolicl,sVtoharrasitoaobsnhtC/Vjnliuevee,oCblocoeUpn,UrstrfeetrsehhilriqItaftnqsieahauiobvseusndiireueresdedsesslnasq.a-amtVtocuLrtanetdiraCiasror-nc.ebsefrSittpembeeshreledoseePfcqonntmiiuhfrrnti-oesecaitsthsgyifrtrateoeaereblrqaqdlneiastuum.hdbasiiTreruepaeheladplmrmeainldonibeecec/ccenoedvnluulvttcosrsiedmens.freftce-VorelpaodCurnnardUtpoyhctese.teglirattTvihorlobeaahedeltbymhelre,m-eusld-clpafepedoeuysrpercorceaitjtrofnehaneinccdedinstligsneirtasueg/nstv.iqtdooeisuarnfeeirnrmtstecVhoimeuCoeulSeanttliannpinbitdlseselat:

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  26
                                         4 Project Registration Process

Diagram 9: Periodic VCU Issuance

Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is at:

    4.5.1 All and any periodic VCU issuances shall be initiated by the project proponent stated on the
              project record in the Verra Registry or its authorized representative. Where another entity wants
              to become the project proponent (and therefore assume the roles and responsibilities of a
              project proponent with respect to the Verra Registry), the process set out in Section 7 shall be

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  27
                                                                4 Project Registration Process

followed. The new project proponent on the project record in the Verra Registry or its authorized
representative can then initiate VCU issuance.

4.6 Step 6: VCU Retirements and Cancelations

at: The Verra Registry displays the status of every VCU issued under the VCS Program. VCUs may have a
is status of active, retired or canceled. Note that VCU retirement and cancelation have specific meanings,
ion as set out in the VCS Program Definitions.
vers The process for retiring active VCUs is set out in Sections 4.6.1 - 4.6.4 below. The process for canceling
nt active VCUs is set out in Sections 4.6.5 - 4.6.8 below.
curreils/. 4.6.1 VCUs may be retired as set out in Diagram 10 below.
he eta Diagram 10: VCU Retirement

        umenot.gTram-d Account holder or authorized
    oc pr representative executes retirement in

             d s- Verra Registry
VCSoPnr-osgtaranmdard/vc Verra Registry records VCU retirement
ion ofritfhieisd-carb 4.6.2 All and any VCU retirements shall be initiated by the registry account holder or its authorized
      ers /ve representative.
nt v ms 4.6.3 The registry account holder or its authorized representative may execute a VCU retirement
      rre gra through its Verra Registry account. The Verra Registry records the details of all VCU retirements.
is not ethrrea.courg/pro 4.6.4
VCUs can be retired incrementally from a registry accountholder's VCU holdings (i.e., when the
VCU holder or its authorized representative requests VCU retirement, it can request retirement
of part of the VCU holdings and request retirement of any or all of the remaining holdings at a
later date). In such cases, the following shall apply:
 his s://v1) The registry account holder or its authorized representative shall designate the specific set
T http of VCUs for retirement through its Verra Registry account.

2) Verra does not specify thresholds or timeframes on incremental VCU retirement (e.g., the
     total number of incremental VCU retirements that can be made from a registry
     accountholder's VCU holdings and the elapsed time between first and last VCU retirement

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                                      28
                                                                4 Project Registration Process

from those holdings). Verra is entitled to apply such thresholds and timeframes as it deems
necessary.

4.6.5 VCUs may be canceled as set out in Diagram 11 below.

t: Diagram 11: VCU Cancelation
e curr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is a 4.6.6
The registry account holder, its authorized representative, the other GHG program in which the
registry account holder is participating or Verra may initiate a VCU cancelation. Note that the
initiator and recipient of a VCU cancelation request depends on the specific circumstances of
the cancelation (e.g., where VCUs are being converted into another form of GHG credit, the
cancelation request may be submitted to Verra by the other GHG program in which the registry
account holder is participating).
t th .org 4.6.7 The registry account holder or its authorized representative may be asked to confirm the details
    no rra of the VCU cancelation request.
  is is ://ve 4.6.8 VCUs are canceled in the Verra Registry and the Verra Registry records the details of all VCU
Thhttps cancelations.

4.7 Step 7: Project Maintenance

Project details may be updated as set out in Diagram 12 below.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                            29
                                         4 Project Registration Process

Diagram 12: Project Maintenance

         Project proponent notifies Verra of change

               t: to project details
        nt version is a Verra updates record on the Verra

                   re Registry
  t. The -cduertails/. 4.7.1 Where a project fails to submit a verification report to the Verra Registry within five years of its

        en am last verification, the following applies:
        cum rogr 1) Verra sends written communication to the project proponent to request evidence that the

           do -p project is still active despite not having verified.
        am /vcs 2) The project proponent shall submit such evidence within one year of receiving the written

           ogr ard communication from Verra.
           S Pr tand a) Evidence may take the form of a letter submitted by the project proponent to Verra and

              C -s should explain in detail the status of the project, including an explanation as to why the
              V on project has not verified and, where relevant, why it should still be considered active.
           f this carb b) The letter may be accompanied by any relevant documentation of activity
              o d- implementation (e.g., photographic evidence, monitoring reports, contract for
              ion rifie verification in the near future).
        vers /ve 3) Where a letter is received, it shall be posted publicly to the Verra Registry and the project
           nt ms status in the registry shall be changed to late to verify.
        urre gra 4) Where no letter is received, the project status shall still be changed to late to verify, but will
           e c /pro not benefit from an explanation being available to potential buyers and other stakeholders.
          th rg The project proponent is encouraged to submit an updated letter annually.
      not rra.o Note ­ Where a project has not verified because it has transitioned to another GHG program
  is is ://ve(e.g., integrated into a government program), its project status shall be changed to project

              transferred to other GHG program instead of late to verify.

Thhttps Note ­ Where an AFOLU project fails to submit a verification report to the Verra Registry within

              five, ten and fifteen years of its last verification, buffer credits are put on hold or canceled (and
              the project status changed to inactive), as appropriate, per the requirements set out in Section
              5.3.6, below.

    4.7.2 Where the project proponent wishes to withdraw the project from the VCS Program (e.g., in

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  30
                                                                                               4 Project Registration Process

              order to transfer the project to another GHG program), the following applies:
              1) The project proponent shall submit a letter (in English) on its organization letterhead, to the

                   Verra Registry, requesting that the project be withdrawn. Such letter shall include the
                   project name, project ID, the reason for the withdrawal request and the signatures and

           at: contact information of all project proponents.
        is 2) Verra reviews the withdrawal request and may request additional information prior to

           ion approving the request.
        vers 3) Upon approval, Verra updates the status of the project to withdrawn. The project

           nt information shall remain publicly available on the Verra Registry, but the project will not be
           urre /. able to issue VCUs.
        e c tails 4) In the case of an AFOLU project where VCUs have been previously issued, the following
           Th e applies:
           nt. m-d a) The project shall not be eligible for any release of buffer credits.
           ume ogra b) Where Verra confirms that the project has registered with another GHG program, all

              oc -pr buffer credits associated with the project shall be canceled.
           am d /vcs c) Where Verra is unable to confirm that the project has registered with another GHG

              gr rd program, buffer credits shall be canceled over time in accordance with the rules set out
              ro da in Section 5.3.6 below.
        S P stan 5) Withdrawn projects may rejoin the VCS Program where the project proponent submits a
           VC on- letter to the Verra Registry requesting same. Such letter shall include the information
           is rb specified in Section 4.7.1(1) above. Verra reviews the project to determine whether it is
           f th -ca eligible to rejoin the VCS Program and notifies the project proponent of the outcome of the
           ion o ified review. Where the project is eligible to rejoin the VCS Program, Verra updates the status of
           s r the project accordingly. Where the project is not eligible to rejoin the VCS Program, the
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarms/ve project shall remain withdrawn.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  31
                                                4 AFOLU Pooled Buffer Account

5 AFOLU POOLED BUFFER ACCOUNT

The VCS Program addresses the non-permanence risk associated with AFOLU project activities by

requiring projects to set aside non-tradable buffer credits to cover unforeseen losses in carbon stocks.

at: The buffer credits from all projects are held in a single AFOLU pooled buffer account, which can be
is drawn upon in the event of a reversal in carbon stocks in any individual project.
ersion 5.1 Assignment of Buffer Credits at First Request for Issuance
ent v At first VCU issuance, buffer credits shall be deposited into the AFOLU pooled buffer account, in
urr /. accordance with the procedures below.
docums-epnrot.gTrahme -cdetails 5.1.1
The number of credits to be deposited in the AFOLU pooled buffer account is determined by the
non-permanence risk report assessed by the validation/verification body(s), in accordance with
the requirements set out in the VCS Standard. The report establishes the non-permanence risk
rating, and this percentage is applied to the net change in the project's carbon stocks (stated in
the verification report) to determine the number of credits to be deposited in the AFOLU pooled
buffer account.
gram rd/vc 5.1.2 Buffer credits are not issued a VCU serial number, nor are they considered to be VCUs. They are
      ro da not subject to the VCU issuance levy.
VCS Pn-stan 5.2 Assignment and Release of Buffer Credits at Subsequent Approved
      this arbo Verification Requests
ion of ified-c A portion of a project's buffer credits may be released to incentivize continued verification, risk
r mitigation, and recognize that certain project risks decrease over time.
is not thrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsms/ve 5.2.1
Projects are eligible for buffer credit releases when the non-permanence risk rating in the latest
approved verification report remains the same or decreases from the previous verification
report. Buffer credit releases occur after the subsequent verification request is approved by
Verra. Project proponents may request a buffer release within 3 months after Verra approves a
verification request. The request must be sent via an email to registry@verra.org. Buffer credits
released from the AFOLU pooled buffer account will be issued as VCUs into the designated
Verra Registry account upon payment of the VCU issuance levy.
 his ://ve 5.2.2 The first buffer credit release shall be no sooner than five years after the first verification report
T https was issued and approved by the registry for VCU issuance. Subsequent buffer credit releases
shall not occur more than once every five years, even if verification reports are issued more

frequently.

5.2.3 Where the five year interval set out in Section 5.2.2 has passed, and where the project's non-
          permanence risk rating of the latest approved verification period remains the same as the risk

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                             32
                                                                                           4 AFOLU Pooled Buffer Account

              rating of the previous approved verification report, a 15 percent "time release" of buffer credits
              is applied. This 15 percent time release shall be applied to the total number of buffer credits
              associated with the project to-date (i.e., the number of buffer credits previously held in the
              AFOLU pooled buffer account plus the number of buffer credits newly deposited).

  at: 5.2.4 Where the project's non-permanence risk rating of the latest approved verification report is
        is lower than the non-permanence risk rating at the previous verification report, the new risk
        ion rating retroactively applies to all reductions and removals formerly verified.
        ers Previously deposited buffer credits that exceed the updated withholding percentage will be
        t v released and issued as VCUs where the five-year interval set out in Section 5.2.2 has passed.
        urren /. A 15 percent "time release" shall also be applied to the total number of buffer credits
        c ils associated with the project to-date (i.e., the number of buffer credits previously held in the
        he eta AFOLU pooled buffer account plus the number of buffer credits newly deposited).

  nt. T m-d 5.2.5 Projects are not eligible for buffer credit releases when the non-permanence risk rating of the
        me gra latest approved verification report is higher than the non-permanence risk rating of the
        cu ro previous approved verification report.

  ram ddo/vcs-p 5.3 Cancelation and Holding of Buffer Credits
  Prog ndar Buffer credits are canceled from the AFOLU pooled buffer account where there are negative reductions
  S sta or removals associated with the project (as compared to the baseline), and are put on hold in certain
  VC n- situations, as outlined in this section.
  this arbo 5.3.1 Where a loss event occurs (see the VCS Program Definitions for the definition of a loss event),

        of d-c the project proponent
        ion ifie shall:
        ers /ver 1) Notify Verra via email within 30 days of discovering the loss event, and
        nt v ms 2) Where VCUs have been previously issued, prepare and submit to registry@verra.org a loss

           rre gra event report within two years of discovering the loss event. Projects that do not submit a
           e cu /pro loss event report within two years of the loss event's discovery date are not eligible to issue
          th rg further VCUs until the report is submitted. Verra puts AFOLU pooled buffer account credits
       ot .o on hold, equivalent to the estimated loss in the loss event report.
  is n erra 5.3.2 When a loss event is detected during verification, the project proponent shall submit a loss
  is ://vevent report before verification approval is requested.
Thhttps 5.3.3 The loss event report shall:

              1) Be prepared using the VCS Loss Event Report Template.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  33
                                                                                           4 AFOLU Pooled Buffer Account

              2) Include a conservative estimate of the loss of previously verified reductions and removals
                   due to losses in carbon stocks from the project. The estimate shall be based on monitoring
                   of the full area affected by the loss event.

              3) Be accompanied by a complete loss event representation signed by the project proponent.

           t: The template for the loss event representation is available on the Verra website.
        is a 4) Be verified by a validation/verification body. The verification may be completed as part of

           ion the subsequent verification.
  ers 5.3.4 The following applies with respect to the verification report submitted after a loss event:

        ent v 1) Where the net GHG benefit of the project for the verification period is negative, a reversal
           urr /. has occurred (see the VCS Program Definitions for definition of reversal) and the following
           e c tails applies:
           t. Th -de a) Where the total reversal is less than the number of credits put on hold after the
              n m submission of the loss event report, Verra cancels buffer credits equivalent to the
              me gra reversal. Any remaining buffer credits shall be released from their on-hold status
              cu ro (though remain in the AFOLU pooled buffer account).
           do cs-p b) Where the reversal is greater than the number of credits put on hold after the
              ram d/v submission of the loss event report, the full amount of buffer credits put on hold with
              og ar respect to the submission of the loss event report shall be canceled, and additional
              S Pr tand buffer credits from the AFOLU pooled buffer account shall be canceled to fully account
              C -s for the reversal.

        is V bon 2) Where the net GHG benefit for the verification period is positive (i.e., all losses have been
           f th car made up over the verification period taking into account project GHG emissions, removals
           o d- and leakage), a reversal has not occurred and buffer credits put on hold after the
           ion ifie submission of the loss event report shall be released from their on-hold status (but shall
           ers /ver remain in the AFOLU pooled buffer account).

  nt v ms 5.3.5 The following applies with respect to the VCU issuance after a reversal:
        urre ogra 1) Where the reversal is an unavoidable reversal (see the VCS Program Definitions for the
           e c /pr definition of unavoidable reversal) the following applies:
         t th .org a) GHG credits shall be deposited in the AFOLU pooled buffer account in an amount

      no rra equivalent to the additional number of buffer credits canceled after the reversal, above
  is is ://ve what has been previously contributed by the project. For example, if the project
 h s previously contributed 100 buffer credits and 150 credits were canceled from the
T http AFOLU pooled buffer account after a reversal, the project would deposit 50 buffer

                        credits (to replenish the pool at large). Buffer credits deposited to replenish the pool
                        after a reversal (50 in the example above) shall never be eligible for release back to the
                        project.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  34
                                                              4 AFOLU Pooled Buffer Account

b) Where further GHG credits are available for VCU issuance after replenishing the AFOLU

pooled buffer account, additional buffer credits shall be deposited in the AFOLU pooled

buffer account in accordance with Section 5.2 (applying the non-permanence risk

rating only to those remaining GHG credits eligible for VCU issuance).

t: 2) Where the reversal is an avoidable reversal (see the VCS Program Definitions for the
   is a definition of avoidable reversal), the following applies:
ion a) GHG credits shall be deposited in the AFOLU pooled buffer account in an amount
   rs equivalent to the full reversal. No further VCUs will be issued to the project or any other
   t ve VCS project solely with the same project proponent, or combination of project
   en proponents, until the deficit is remedied.
curr ils/. b) Where further GHG credits are available for VCU issuance after replenishing the AFOLU
   he ta pooled buffer account, additional buffer credits shall be deposited in the AFOLU pooled
   t. T -de buffer account in accordance with Section 5.2 (applying the non-permanence risk
   n m rating only to those remaining GHG credits available for VCU issuance).
ume ogra 5.3.6 Where a project fails to submit a verification report to the Verra Registry within five years of its
      oc -pr last verification 50 percent of the buffer credits associated with the project shall be put on
      d cs hold.
ogramard/v 5.3.7 Where a project fails to submit a verification report within ten years, all its remaining buffer
      Pr nd credits shall be put on hold.
ion of itfhieisd-VcCarSbon-sta 5.3.8
Where no subsequent verification report has been submitted within a period of 15 years, and
the project crediting period has not yet expired, buffer credits are canceled from the AFOLU
pooled buffer account in an amount equivalent to the total number of VCUs issued to the
project (including buffer credits put on hold) and the project's status will be changed to
inactive.
ers /ver 5.3.9 Inactive projects shall apply the latest version of the applicable methodology and VCS Program
      nt v ms rules and reassess the baseline when reactivating.
rre gra 5.3.10 Where a project has not verified because it has transitioned to another GHG program (e.g.,
      e cu /pro integrated into a government program), its status will be changed to project transferred to other
      th rg GHG program instead of inactive, and the remaining balance of buffer credits is canceled.
  not rra.o 5.3.11 Where buffer credits are put on hold because a project does not submit a verification report
  is is ://vewithin five years of the previous verification, the project may re-claim buffer credits. A new
 h s verification report shall be submitted prior to the expiration of the project crediting period.
T http Verra reassigns buffer credits that have been put on hold in accordance with the procedure set
out in Section 5.1.1 above. The remaining balance of buffer credits associated with a project

will be canceled at the end of the project crediting period.

5.3.12 Where a project has a crediting period of less than 40 years, and an avoidable reversal (see the
          VCS Program Definitions for the definition of avoidable reversal) occurs within 40 years of the

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                            35
                                                                                           4 AFOLU Pooled Buffer Account

              project's start date, the following applies:
               1) The project proponent shall submit a loss event report to the Verra Registry within two

                     years of reversal detection. The loss event report shall meet the requirements of Section

Thihsttipssn:/o/vt2et)hrretp5aTahhmr..3ecoeooj.ued3prurceg.rnrtof/etisjpceenoirtcqltoetiusvlgpiyvrerreawoarmlpisemtohneiontdstenhit/enovedtoets.hsfraheitmfahifeluelislddlpe-rrVecopvCajoeesrcSribstt aopGPlrn.HorN-Gopsoogctnafrrueeanrndmtdthit,aseodrrirndoVcC/tcovhUmuecsmbsAwi-FnepiOlalnrtLboitoU.egnTpirsooahsfomuepleer-cddodujbteeoructrtfaaefpneinlryrsotao/pv.ctohceneorerusnnVitotCs,inSnuiansntilat:

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  36
                                                                  6 Quality Control of Registered Projects

6 QUALITY CONTROL OF REGISTERED

PROJECTS ion is at: 6.1 Process

ers 6.1.1 Verra may, at its discretion, review registered projects and issued VCUs where it has concerns
      t v about adherence of the project to the VCS Program rules and the applied methodology. A
      ren review may be triggered by any of the following:
      cur ils/. 1) A validation/verification body performing a verification of a registered project identifies an
         he eta error or quality issue in a previous validation or verification.

      nt. T m-d 2) A project proponent identifies an error or quality issue after the registration or issuance of
         me gra the project.

      ocu -pro 3) A stakeholder has concerns about a registered project4.
      am d /vcs 4) Verra itself identifies an error or quality issue, as part of routine operations.
ogr ard 6.1.2 Where a review is triggered, Verra notifies the project proponent (or its authorized
      Pr nd representative) and the relevant validation/verification body of the review and may suspend
      S sta further VCU issuance while the review is performed.
ion of itfhieisd-VcCarbon- 6.1.3
Where non-conformances are identified during the review, the validation/verification body shall
provide a written response to findings in a project review report (e.g., corrective action requests
or clarification requests) issued by Verra. Verra also suspends further VCU issuance, where it
has not already done so.
ers /ver Note ­ Where the relevant validation/verification body is unable to respond due to reasons
t v s such as a cease of operations or accreditation, Verra may solicit a response to the findings
ren ram from alternative entities such as the project proponent or another validation/verification body.
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrg/prog 6.1.4
The follow-up actions of the validation/verification body and/or project proponent shall depend
on whether the relevant validation or verification was completed before, on or after 8 April
2014, and shall be as set out in Tables 3 and 4 below. In all cases, the relevant
validation/verification body shall undertake a root cause analysis to identify why such quality
issues occurred.

4 Concerns may be raised, in confidence, with Verra at any time.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                           37
                                         6 Quality Control of Registered Projects

Table 3: Actions for Validations and Verifications Completed Before 8 April 2014

Issues found, but no excess VCU          Issues found, with excess VCU

issuance and no risk of future excess issuance and/or risk of future excess

issuance                                 issuance
is at: Project

qualifies

ion under
t vers program
1) Validation/verification body shall    1) Validation/verification body shall
     conduct a root cause analysis            conduct a root cause analysis

2) Verra lifts suspension on VCU issuance 2) Validation/verification body or project
                                                                 proponent, as appropriate, shall revise
                                                                 project documents
                                         urren /. 3) Verra lifts suspension on VCU
                                            c ils issuance, upon acceptance of project
                                            e ta document revisions
                                         t. Th -de 4) Verra uploads revised project
                                            n m documents to the Verra Registry
         cume rogra Project
1) Validation/verification body shallo -p does not1) Validation/verification body shall
     conduct a root cause analysisd cs qualifyconduct a root cause analysis
         am /v under
2) No further VCU issuance is permittedThihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtar ndard program2) No further VCU issuance is permitted

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                   38
                                                         6 Quality Control of Registered Projects

Table 4: Actions for Validations and Verifications Completed on or After 8 April 2014

Issues found, but no excess VCU                          Issues found, with excess VCU

issuance and no risk of future excess issuance and/or risk of future excess

issuance                                                 issuance
is at: Project
1) Validation/verification body shall                    1) Validation/verification body shall
qualifiesconduct a root cause analysis                        conduct a root cause analysis

ion under
cumenrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ers program
2) Validation/verification body or project 2) Where significant performance issues

proponent, as appropriate, shall revise                  are found, and as appropriate,

project documents                                        disciplinary action shall be taken

3) Verra lifts suspension on VCU                         against the validation/verification body

issuance, upon acceptance of project 3) Validation/verification body or project

document revisions                                       proponent, as appropriate, shall revise

4) Verra uploads revised project                         project documents

documents to the Verra Registry                          4) Project proponent may need to

                                                         compensate for excess issuance (see

                                                         Section 6.1.5)
                                              do s-p 5) Verra lifts suspension on VCU
                                          am /vcissuance, upon acceptance of project
                                         gr rd document revisions by Verra
                                           Pro nda 6) Verra uploads revised project
                                         S ta documents to the Verra Registry
VC on-s Project
this rb does not
f -ca qualify
o d under
ersion/verifie program
1) Validation/verification body shall                    1) Validation/verification body shall
     conduct a root cause analysis                            conduct a root cause analysis

2) Where significant performance issues 2) Where significant performance issues

are found, and as appropriate,                           are found, and as appropriate,

disciplinary action shall be taken                       disciplinary action shall be taken

currenrtovgrams 3) No further VCU issuance is permitted
against the validation/verification body                 against the validation/verification body

                                                         3) Project proponent may need to
                                                              compensate for excess issuance (see
                                                              Section 6.1.5)
the rg/p 4) No further VCU issuance is permitted
  is is n:/o/vt erra.o 6.1.5 Where Verra determines that VCUs have been issued in excess of the correct amount, the
Thhttps following applies:

1) The project proponent is responsible for compensating for excess VCU issuance where

Verra deems, acting reasonably, that there has been a material erroneous issuance of

VCUs in respect of the project, as a result of the fraudulent conduct, negligence, intentional

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                              39
                                                                                6 Quality Control of Registered Projects

                   act, recklessness, misrepresentation or mistake of the project proponent, as set out further
                   in the issuance representation.
              2) Any compensation for excess VCU issuance shall be through the following, with Verra using
                   reasonable efforts to work with the project proponent to ensure that any adverse impacts

           t: on the project proponent are minimized to the extent possible.
           is a a) Where the excess VCUs remain in the project proponent's Verra Registry account and it

              ion can be demonstrated that they have not been used for offsetting purposes, immediate
              rs cancelation of the VCUs.
           nt ve b) Replacement of VCUs through immediate cancelation from subsequent issuances of
              urre /. VCUs to the project.
           c ils c) Purchase by the project proponent of an equivalent number of replacement VCUs, and
              he eta cancelation of same, within 60 business days of receiving formal Verra notification of
              t. T -d such required action.
        men gram 3) Where the project proponent fails to compensate for excess VCU issuance, Verra may take
           cu ro action against the project proponent, including applying sanctions with respect to its
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/vcs-p registry account activities until such time as the excess issuance has been compensated.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  40
                                         7 Further Information

7 FURTHER INFORMATION

at: 7.1 Communications Agreement
t version is 7.1.1
The purpose of the communications agreement is to designate an authorized representative.
An authorized representative is appointed by the project proponent(s) or registry user(s) to act
as an agent on their behalf with respect to a project and/or the registry user's account(s).
Templates for communications agreements are available on the Verra website.
urren /. 7.1.2 Where there are multiple project proponents, all project proponents shall execute the
      c ils communications agreement, which shall be provided to the Verra Registry. The authorized
      he eta representative may be a third party or appointed from among the project proponents.
nt. T m-d 7.1.3 Where there is a single project proponent, a communications agreement may also be provided
      me gra to designate a third party as an authorized representative.
CS Pr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucs-pro 7.1.4
To terminate an authorized representative, the project proponent (where there is one project
proponent) or all project proponents (where there are multiple project proponents) shall provide
a signed written notification of the termination to Verra. Thereafter, the project proponent(s)
shall follow the requirements in Section 7.1.2 and 7.1.3 to sign a new communications
agreement, where relevant. Such agreement supersedes any prior (terminated)
communications agreement.
is V rbon 7.1.5 A project shall only have one authorized representative at any given time, as appointed via the
      f th ca communications agreement.
  rsion oerified- 7.2 Release and Accession of Project Proponents
  t ve s/v 7.2.1 Project proponents may join or leave a project subsequent to project listing or registration.

        ren ram Such accession and release is handled via representations made by acceding entities and
        ur og project proponents as follows:
        the c g/pr 1) Where an entity wants to join a project, it and the existing project proponent(s) shall sign an
         t .or accession representation, which shall be prepared using the VCS Deed of Accession
      no rraTemplate and properly executed as a deed in accordance with applicable local laws and the
  is is ://ve organization's own constitutional documents. Where more than one entity wants to join the
 h s project, one accession representation shall be signed for each acceding entity.
T http 2) Where a project proponent wants to leave a project (i.e., give up its rights and obligations in

respect of the project), it, the remaining project proponent(s) and Verra shall sign a partial

release representation, which shall be prepared using the VCS Deed of Partial Release

Template and properly executed as a deed in accordance with applicable local laws and the

organization's own constitutional documents. Where more than one project proponent

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                               41
                                          7 Further Information

wants to be released from the project, one partial release representation shall be signed

for each project proponent that is leaving. Note that a project shall always have at least

one project proponent, so there shall always be at least one remaining registration

representor (project proponent) that signs the partial release representation.

t: 3) The accession and/or partial release representations shall be submitted to the Verra
   is a Registry, which uploads the accession and/or partial release representations to the Verra
   n Registry and updates the project record to reflect the change in project proponent.

rsio 4) Once this process is complete, only the new project proponent or its authorized
   t ve representative are permitted to initiate subsequent VCU issuance.

urren /. Note ­ Where a project has one project proponent only and the project proponent wants to
c ils leave the project in favor of another entity, this is handled by having the new entity accede to
e ta the project via an accession representation and the original project proponent released from
Th e the project via a release representation.
ent. ram-d 7.3 Comments Received Outside of a Public Comment Period
ocum prog 7.3.1 Stakeholders may submit comments outside of the 30-day public comment period. Such
      d cs- comments shall be submitted to secretariat@verra.org.
is VCSboPnr-osgtaranmdard/v 7.3.2
Comments received outside of the 30-day public comment period are sent to the project
proponent and the validation/verification body performing the next validation or verification,
where known. Where the validation/verification body is not known, Verra sends the comments
to the project proponent and the project proponent shall provide the comments and any
actions taken or comments responses to the validation/verification body.
rrent verarsmiosn/voefritfhied-car 7.3.3
Project proponents shall address any comments received while validation or verification is
ongoing (e.g., a comment received outside of the 30-day public comment period but while the
validation is ongoing must be addressed as part of validation). Any comments received when a
validation or verification is not ongoing shall be addressed at the subsequent validation or
verification unless Verra determines a review of project documents is required, as described in
Section 6 above.
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courg/prog 7.3.4 The comments are made public with the rest of the public documents at each request.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                                          42
Appendix 1 Eligibility conditions for Conversion of GHG Credits into VCUs

 APPENDIX 1 ELIGIBILITY CONDITIONS FOR

 CVCOUNSVERSION OF GHG CREDITS INTOersion is at: This appendix provides the eligibility conditions (effective dates) for credit conversions for credits

  t v issued to projects and CPAs registered under another GHG program, with activities included within the
  ren scope of the VCS Program (see VCS Standard, Section 2.1). These conditions remain unchanged from
  cur ils/. the 5 February 2021 Errata and Clarifications (for GHG credits issued to standalone projects) and from
  e ta the 19 April 2022 update to the VCS Program rules and requirements (for GHG credits issued to CPAs).
  Th de These conditions are copied to this appendix for greater ease of use.
  umenot.gram- GHG Credits issued to standalone projects, seeking conversion into VCUs
  doc -pr GHG credits issued to projects registered under another GHG program, with activities that are included
  am /vcs within the scope of the VCS Program are only eligible for conversion into VCUs where one of the
  gr rd following is demonstrated:5
  Pro nda A1.1 For GHG credits issued to a project that does not include afforestation and/or reforestation

        S sta activities:
        is VC bon- 1) The project shall have an original project crediting period start date on or after 1 January

           th ar 2016 with another GHG program; or
        ion of ified-c 2) Where the project has an original project crediting period start date from 1 January 2013 to

           r 31 December 2015, the project shall have issued credits during the period 1 January 2016
           ers /ve to 5 March 2021, or shall have a status of "issuance requested" on the relevant GHG
           nt v ms program registry by 5 March 2021.
  rre gra A1.2 For GHG credits issued to a project with afforestation and/or reforestation activities, the project
        e cu /pro shall have been registered under another GHG program on or after 1 January 2013.6 Further,
Thisttipssn:/o/vt ethrra.org 5 GHG credits are deemed to have met these timelines where Verra confirmed (in writing, to the project proponent or an
  hauthorized representative) the credits' eligibility on or before 4 February 2021.

     6 Note that for a project seeking to convert GHG credits to VCUs, a project with activities within the Agriculture, Forestry,
     and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector shall register under the VCS Program, and the project shall be required to deposit
     credits into the AFOLU pooled buffer account in accordance with the AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool. Such a project
     shall first register under the VCS Program before any GHG credits may be converted into VCUs, given the risk of non-
     permanence (see VCS Registration and Issuance Process, v4.3 Section 4.2.16(5)).

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4  43
Appendix 1 Eligibility conditions for Conversion of GHG Credits into VCUs

the following applies with respect to vintages:7

A3.1 For GHG credits issued to a project that does not include afforestation and/or reforestation

activities, only GHG credits with vintages beginning on or after 1 January 2016 are eligible for

conversion into VCUs.
ion is at: A3.1
For GHG credits issued to a project with afforestation and/or reforestation activities, only GHG
credits with vintages beginning on or after 1 January 2013 are eligible for conversion into
VCUs.
nt vers GHG Credits issued to CDM CPAs, seeking conversion into VCUs
urre /. GHG credits issued to CDM CPAs registered under another GHG program, with activities that are
e c tails included within the scope of the VCS Program are only eligible for conversion into VCUs where one of
Th de the following is demonstrated:8
ent. am- A1.5 For GHG credits issued to a CDM CPA that does not include afforestation and/or reforestation

      m gr activities:
      docu s-pro 1) The CPA shall be part of a Program of Activities (PoA) with an original program crediting

         am /vc period start date on or after 1 January 2016; or
      ogr ard 2) Where the CPA is part of a Program of Activities (PoA) with an original program crediting

         Pr nd period start date from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2015 and where the CPA has an
         CS -sta original crediting period start date from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2015, the CPA
         V on shall have issued credits during the period 1 January 2016 to 5 March 2021, or shall have
         this rb a status of "issuance requested" by 5 March 2021; or
      of d-ca 3) Where the CPA is part of a PoA with an original program crediting period start date from 1
         ion ifie January 2013 to 31 December 2015 and where the CPA has an original crediting period
         ers /ver start date on or after 1 January 2016, no prior credit issuance is required.
nt v ms A1.6 For GHG credits issued to a CPA with afforestation and/or reforestation activities, the CPA shall
      rre gra be part of a PoA that was registered on or after 1 January 2013.
e cu /pro Further, the following applies with respect to vintages:9
Thisttipssn:/o/vt ethrra.org 7 Similarly, GHG credits are deemed to have met these timelines where Verra confirmed (in writing, to the project
  hproponent or an authorized representative) the credits' eligibility on or before 4 February 2021.

8 GHG credits are deemed to have met these timelines where Verra confirmed (in writing, to the project proponent or an
authorized representative) the credits' eligibility on or before 4 February 2021.

9 Similarly, GHG credits are deemed to have met these timelines where Verra confirmed (in writing, to the project proponent
or an authorized representative) the credits' eligibility on or before 4 February 2021.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                                                         44
      Appendix 1 Eligibility conditions for Conversion of GHG Credits into VCUs

A1.7  For GHG credits issued to a CPA that does not include afforestation and/or reforestation
      activities, only GHG credits with vintages beginning on or after 1 January 2016 are eligible for
      conversion into VCUs.

    A1.8 For GHG credits issued to a CPA with afforestation and/or reforestation activities, only GHG                                                 is  at:
              credits with vintages beginning on or after 1 January 2013 are eligible for conversion into

Thihsttipssn:/o/VvtCetUhrsre.a.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                                                                               45
                                                          Appendix 2 Document History

APPENDIX 2 DOCUMENT HISTORY

Version Date  Comment

   t: v4.019 Sep 2019 Initial version released under VCS Version 4
   n is a v4.1
   urrent/v. ersio v4.220 Jan 2022Updated the pipeline listing process and public comment procedures to require
Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cdetails v4.3all projects to list as under validation or update the project status to under
              validation before beginning the public comment period (Section 3) (effective
              from 20 July 2022 for all new pipeline listing requests).

22 Jun 2022 Main updates (all effective on issue date, unless otherwise stated):

                     1) New rules set out how proponents may submit requests to have VCUs
                          labeled (Section 4.2.18).

                     2) Incorporated clarification to eligibility conditions for the conversion of GHG
                          credits issued to standalone projects into VCUs from Errata & Clarification to
                          VCS Program Rules and Requirements, v4.0, published on 5 February 2021.
                          See Appendix 1. This clarification is effective from 5 February 2021.

                     3) Introduced clarification to eligibility conditions for the conversion of GHG
                          credits issued to CDM CPAs into VCUs into Appendix 1.

21 Dec 2022 Main updates (all effective on issue date, unless otherwise stated):

                     1) Updated language in Sections 3 and 4 to simplify descriptions of Verra
                           review processes.

                     2) Updated language in Sections 3.1.15 and 3.1.18 to provide further
                           information on how projects request reactivation from inactive status on the
                           Verra Registry.

                     3) Language added to Sections 3.1.17 and 3.1.19 to clarify Verra's process to
                           reject project pipeline listings.

                     4) Updated language in Section 4.1.2 to require ERRs in monitoring and
                           verification reports to be broken down by vintages by calendar year,
                           effective 1 April 2023.

                     5) Updated language in Section 4.2.3 to clarify the requirement that project
                           proponents shall submit: any supporting annexes necessary to read the
                           application; any emission reduction and removal calculation spreadsheets;
                           any AFOLU-specific documentation.

                     6) Added language to Section 4.2.18 to clarify the requirement for no gaps in
                           monitoring periods for AFOLU projects, grouped projects, and other projects
                           with risk of reversal or loss. Effective immediately for grouped projects,
                           AFOLU projects, and other projects with a risk of reversal or loss that have
                           gaps in monitoring periods. These projects shall submit monitoring and

              verification reports for such gaps before requesting verification approval for

              any subsequent verification period. Projects which have already begun

              verification activities for a previous gap in monitoring periods may proceed

              with submitting such monitoring and verification reports, where confirmed

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                       46
                                                      Appendix 2 Document History

           by Verra, in writing, to the project proponent or an authorized representative
           on or before 21 December 2022.

           7) Updated language in Section 4.2.20 to clarify requirement that VVBs must

           be accredited for the relevant sectoral scope and provide information on

                           how Verra checks that requirement.
                     8) Added language to Sections 5.3.1. and 5.3.3 to clarify that in the event of a

                           non-catastrophic reversal no further VCUs will be issued to the project or
                           any other project the project proponent has registered on the VCS registry
                           until the buffer is replenished.

17 Jan 2023 Minor cross-referencing and formatting errors were corrected.
   ersion is at: v4.3
29 AugustThihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. v4.4Updates are listed with a unique ID# as referenced in the August 2023 Overview
2023       of VCS Program Updates and Effective Dates (PDF), available on the Verra
           website.

           ID# Update Description and Effective Date                     Section

           40. Clarified processes related pipeline listing initiation.  3.1.1 ­ 3.1.6
                   Effective immediately

           41. Updates from the 30 March 2023 Errata & Clarification 3.1.3, 3.1.4,

           regarding the VCS Fee Schedule update were                    4.2.22, 4.6.4

           incorporated with an effective date of 1 May 2023.

           Effective immediately

           42. Clarified that projects cannot submit a joint program     3.1.6., 4.2.8

           template for any request if the project is only requesting

           listing, registration, verification approval, or crediting

           period renewal under one program.

           Effective immediately

           43. Clarified which project documents are publicly posted     3.1.11, 3.1.14,
                   for each project request.                             4.2.7

                   Effective immediately

           44. Minor update to clarify validation deadline process.      3.1.17
                   Effective immediately

           5. Clarified which documents are required for baseline        4.2.6
                   reassessment and removed unnecessary language.

           Effective for all project requests submitted on or after 1
           March 2024

           Clarified that baseline reassessment is required to           5.3.9
           reactivate an already registered project. Effective
           immediately.

           21. Clarified evidence requirements for no double issuance 4.2.15, 4.2.17,

           and no double claiming.                                       4.2.19

           Effective for all project requests submitted on or after 1
           March 2024

           45. Updated request denial processes, and restructured the 4.3
                   information related to review process.

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                   47
                                         Appendix 2 Document History

           Verra Registry statuses to reflect these processes will
           be available soon.

           Effective immediately

           35. Added clarity to processes related to VCU label           4.4.7 ­4.4.8

Thihsttipssn:/o/vt ethrrea.courrgr/epnrtovgerarsmiosn/voefritfhieisd-VcCarSboPnr-osgtaranmdadrdo/cvucms-epnrot.gTrahme -cduertraeinlst/v. ersion is at: v4.4requirements.
           Effective immediately

           9. Clarified buffer release requirements, including           5.2.1 ­ 5.2.5
                   requirements for when a project can request a buffer
                   release.

                   Effective immediately

           37. Clarified loss event reporting requirements.              5.3.1 -5.3.7
                   Effective immediately

           10. Updated non-permanence monitoring and                     5.3.4, 5.3.12

           compensation requirements to a minimum of 40 years.

           Effective for all project requests submitted on or after 1
           March 2024

           11. References across program documents to `catastrophic' 5.3.5, 5.3.12
                   and `non-catastrophic' reversals have been updated to
                   the new terminology of `unavoidable' and `avoidable'
                   reversals, respectively. Effective immediately

           46. Revised the communication agreement requirements 7.1.1 ­ 7.1.5
                   with clearer information about how project proponent(s)
                   submit communication agreements to the Registry to
                   designate one Authorized Representative for the
                   project.

                   Effective immediately

           19. Added requirements for comments received outside of 7.3
                   the public comment period for both project proponents
                   and validation/verification bodies.

                   Effective for all project requests submitted on or after 1
                   March 2024

4 October  Minor typographical and formatting errors corrected.
2023

Registration and Issuance Process, v4.4                                                 48
ThihsttipsSsn:/o/tvteathrrena.coudrrgr/eapnrtorvgderarsmsiosn/vfoeofritfhireisd-VcaCarSbSoPnru-osgtasranmtdaadrdoi/cnvucmsa-epnbrot.glTreahme -cFduertruaeinltst/vu. errsieon is at:
