VCS Program Guide

Version 5.0

                                                                       16 December 2025
All intellectual property rights in this document and any related materials for its interpretation and application constitute
"Website Materials" as defined in the Verra Website Terms and Conditions of Use. All applicable terms and conditions
set out therein apply to this document.

Website Materials are owned by Verra or by third parties who have licensed their materials to Verra and are protected by
applicable intellectual property laws.

Use of this Website Material in the establishment or operation of a project or development of a methodology under a
Verra certification program is permitted ("Authorized Use"). Any other use, including copying, modifying, distributing, or
creating derivative works, whether in whole or in part, is prohibited unless expressly authorized by Verra or the relevant
rights holder.

All proprietary notices must be retained in any copies made under the Authorized Use. Verra trademarks, logos, and
brand names may not be used without Verra's prior written consent.

All rights not expressly granted herein are reserved.
CONTENTS

1 INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................1

    1.1 VCS Program Versions and Effective Dates.................................................................. 1
    1.2 Language......................................................................................................................... 5
    1.3 Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 5

2 OVERVIEW OF THE VCS PROGRAM ........................................................6

    2.1 Program Objectives ........................................................................................................ 6
    2.2 Program History................................................................................................................ 6
    2.3 VCS Program Scope........................................................................................................ 7
    2.4 VCS Sectoral Scopes....................................................................................................... 7
    2.5 Program Documents ....................................................................................................... 8
    2.6 Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................................................. 11

3 VCU ATTRIBUTES .....................................................................................14

4 VERRA REGISTRY ....................................................................................15

    4.1 VCS Program Fees ......................................................................................................... 17
    4.2 VCU Liability and Statute of Limitations....................................................................... 17

5 VCS PROGRAM APPROVAL ..................................................................18

6 VALIDATION/VERIFICATION BODY SANCTIONS ..................................19

7 GRIEVANCE REDRESS POLICY ...............................................................21

DOCUMENT HISTORY.......................................................................................22
                                                                                                                 1 Introduction

1 INTRODUCTION

The Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) Program provides a global program and standard for GHG emission
reduction and carbon dioxide removal projects and programs. It uses as its core the requirements set
out in ISO 14064-2, ISO 14064-3, and ISO 14065. The VCS Program Guide (this document) is the
overarching program document and provides the rules and requirements governing the VCS Program
and describes the constituent parts of the program such as the project and program registration
process, the Verra Registry system, and the accreditation requirements for validation/verification
bodies (VVBs).

1.1 VCS Program Versions and Effective Dates

VCS Program Editions

VCS Program editions are labeled with a version number and program documents are correspondingly
version controlled.

VCS Version 5 was released in December 2025 and replaces VCS Version 4 as the applicable version
of the VCS Program. Effective dates are set out for all VCS Version 5 requirements.

New editions of the VCS Program are issued periodically when major program changes are required.
Development of new editions of the program involves engagement with stakeholders through public
consultation, and with Verra's expert advisory groups.
Document Versions

VCS Program documents are labeled with a version number. VCS Version 5 is comprised of all the
program documents labeled v5.x, where x is a running number starting at zero. Individual program
documents may be updated periodically between program editions. The VCS Program edition is referred
to as VCS Version 5 regardless of the version numbers of individual program documents.

Projects and Verified Carbon Units (VCUs) are not labeled in the Verra Registry with a specific version of
the VCS Program. Instead, project documentation indicates the version number of the VCS Standard
under which the project was validated (e.g., "validated to VCS Standard, v4.7") and the version under
which the project was most recently verified (e.g., "verified to VCS Standard, v5.0"). This indicates that
a project has maintained its conformance to the prevailing versions of the VCS Standard throughout its
lifetime.

The VCS Program documents for previous editions of the VCS Program are available on the Verra
website and should be referred to for the VCS Program rules under such previous editions.

Corrections and Clarifications

Correction documents are issued periodically to correct errors in text, equations, or figures in VCS
Program documents and methodologies. Clarification documents are issued to provide additional

                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                 1 Introduction

guidance or clarity on VCS Program rules, or to issue minor, urgent updates to requirements ahead of a
new version of a VCS Program document being issued.
Correction and clarification (C&C) documents are posted on the Verra website alongside the relevant
program document or methodology. Project proponents and VVBs must apply and interpret the VCS
Program rules and methodological requirements consistent with any corrections and clarifications.
Corrections and clarifications are incorporated into the next issued version of the relevant program
document or methodology.
Effective Dates of Program Updates
New or revised program requirements are referred to as program updates. An effective date for each
update gives project proponents and VVBs time to adjust any project planning, implementation, and
reporting to conform to the program update. Effective dates are established on a requirement-by-
requirement basis, because some requirements only apply to new projects, while others apply to all
projects.
Where a program document is updated, the "Document History" section of the document describes the
updates made and their effective dates. Major updates are also accompanied by an Overview of
Program Updates and Effective Dates document. Project proponents and VVBs must review the VCS
Program Rules and Requirements page on the Verra website to ensure that they are using the
applicable version of all program documents.
For program updates that are not effective immediately, project proponents may choose to conform to
updated requirements before their effective date. Where a project proponent chooses to do this, the
VVB validates or verifies the project in accordance with the updated requirements.

  Guidance: How to prepare for effective dates of program updates

  Project proponents and VVBs should:
       · review the Verra website to confirm that they are using the most recent effective
            versions of all templates, representations, and forms to facilitate reporting against
            current program requirements.
       · ensure that projects can demonstrate conformance to a program update in project
            documentation by the effective date.
       · be aware of all forthcoming and recently released program updates. All public
            consultations and program updates are listed on the VCS Governance and
            Development page of the Verra website.

                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                  1 Introduction

Effective date timelines generally fit into one of three categories:

     · Effective immediately: where project proponents and VVBs must conform to an update
          immediately to maintain program integrity and project quality, or where Verra's internal
          procedures change

     · Effective in 3­6 months: where a short period of time is needed for project proponents and
          VVBs to become aware of and conform to an update by making appropriate changes to project
          design, implementation, and reporting, and for Verra to provide training to project proponents
          and VVBs

     · Effective in 12 months: where a longer period of time is needed for project proponents and
          VVBs to become aware of and conform to an update by making appropriate changes to project
          design, implementation, and reporting, and for Verra to provide training to project proponents
          and VVBs

An overview of guiding criteria that Verra uses to set effective dates is provided in Table 1. Verra may
set other effective dates where program or project integrity or other concerns warrant doing so.

Table 1. Setting effective dates for VCS Program updates

Effective date type        Description                  Examples

Effective immediately for  All project requests         New or revised requirements to ensure program
all project requests1      submitted on or after the    integrity and project quality, to comply with
                           update release date must     external initiatives (e.g., Carbon Offsetting and
                           conform to the program       Reduction Scheme for International Aviation
                           update.                      (CORSIA), the Integrity Council for the Voluntary
                                                        Carbon Market (ICVCM)), or to prevent errors in
                                                        interpreting VCS Program rules

                                                        Updated template instructions and clarifications
                                                        to a requirement where the original intent of the
                                                        requirement is maintained

                                                        Clarifications or changes to Verra's review
                                                        processes or other internal procedures

Effective for all project  All project requests         New or revised requirements where it is
requests submitted on or   submitted on or after the    reasonable to allow time for the project
after X date               effective date must conform  proponent or VVB to conform to the requirements
                           to the program update.       (e.g., affecting program implementation,
                                                        monitoring, quantification, safeguards,
                                                        stakeholder communication)

1 Project request refers to a project proponent submitting a new project request (i.e., changing a project status) in
the Verra Registry or Verra Project Hub. For more information about submitting project requests, see the
Registration and Issuance Process.

                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                         1 Introduction

Effective date type             Description                    Examples

Effective from the next         All crediting period renewal   New or revised requirements that apply to already
crediting period renewal        requests or verification       registered projects and these projects need more
requests or verification        approval requests that         time to conform to the program update
approval requests that          include a baseline
includes a baseline             reassessment submitted on
reassessment submitted          or after the effective date
on or after X date              must conform to the
                                program update.

Effective for all               All project registration       New or revised requirements related to project
registration requests           requests submitted on or       design or validation-specific requirements (e.g.,
(including joint validation     after the effective date must  project start date, project eligibility)
and verification requests)      conform to the program
submitted on or after X         update.
date

Effective for all verification  All verification approval      New or revised requirements that project
approval requests               requests submitted on or       proponents must conform to during project
submitted on or after X         after the effective date       implementation (e.g., ongoing monitoring, ex-post
date                            (including joint validation    quantification of reductions and removals,
                                and verification approval      ongoing free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC),
                                requests) must conform to      demonstrating identification and mitigation of
                                the program update.            safeguard risks)

Effective for projects with     Projects with a project start  New or revised requirements that relate to
a project start date after X    date after the effective date  actions that occur prior to the project start date
date                            must conform to the            (e.g., pre-start date stakeholder engagement,)
                                program update.

Effective for projects          Projects which initiate        New or revised requirements where only projects
which initiate validation or    validation or verification on  that have begun a validation or verification
verification on or after X      or after the effective date    process after the specified date must conform to
date                            must conform to the            the program update
                                program update.

Effective for all new           Applies to the VCS             Updates to the VCS Methodology Requirements
methodologies under             Methodology Requirements.      that must be included in methodologies moving
development and revisions       New approved                   forward (e.g., provisions for baseline setting,
to existing methodologies       methodologies and              quantifying reductions and removals, new
that are approved on or         methodology revisions must     sections)
after X date                    conform to these
                                requirements.

                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                 1 Introduction

1.2 Language

The operating language of the VCS Program is English. The VCS Program documents may be translated
into other languages to facilitate local use. However, the English versions of VCS Program documents,
and the interpretation of same, shall take precedence over any other language translations.

1.3 Definitions

Definitions as set out in the VCS Program Definitions, ISO 14064-2, ISO 14064-3, and ISO 14065 shall
apply to all VCS Program documentation. Note that defined terms in the VCS Program documents, in
common with ISO convention, are used without capital first letters.

                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                       2 Overview of the VCS Program

2 OVERVIEW OF THE VCS PROGRAM

2.1 Program Objectives

The VCS Program establishes the rules and requirements that operationalize the VCS Standard to
enable the validation of GHG projects and programs and the verification of GHG emission reductions
(reductions) and carbon dioxide removals (removals) that can be used both in voluntary and
compliance markets. The VCS Program aims to:

     1) establish clear rules and procedures to enable the successful development of GHG projects
          and programs and the creation of high-quality GHG credits;

     2) create a trusted and fungible GHG credit, the VCU;
     3) stimulate innovation in GHG mitigation technologies and measures as well as procedures for

          validation, verification, and registration, all within a context of quality, credibility, and
          transparency;
     4) provide a secure registry system for all VCUs that offers assurance against double counting and
          provides transparency to the public;
     5) demonstrate workable frameworks and offer lessons that can be incorporated into other GHG
          programs and climate change regulation;
     6) provide oversight to ensure that investors, buyers and the market recognize VCUs as being real,
          additional, and permanent; and
     7) link carbon markets worldwide through a coherent and robust framework.

2.2 Program History

The Climate Group, the International Emissions Trading Association, and the World Business Council for
Sustainable Development are the partner organizations that founded the VCS Program. The World
Economic Forum also partnered in the development of the VCS Program for part of the process. The
following editions of the VCS Program documents have been released:

     · VCS Version 1 was released on 28 March 2006 as both a consultation document and a
          standard for use by the market.

     · VCS Version 2 was released in October 2006 as a consultation document and did not replace
          VCS Version 1 as the applicable version. After two years of work, two rounds of public
          consultation, and the work of the 19-member steering committee2 and seven technical working

2 The members of the steering committee were Jan-Willem Bode, Derik Broekhoff, Mike Burnett, Robert Dornau,
Steve Drummond, Mitchell Feierstein, Yoshito Izumi, Mark Kenber, Adam Kirkman, Andrei Marcu, Erin Meezan,

                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                       2 Overview of the VCS Program

          groups, VCS 2007 was released on 19 November 2007. VCS 2007.1, which incorporated
          requirements for agriculture, forestry, and other land use projects, was released on 18
          November 2008.
     · VCS Version 3 was issued on 8 March 2011
     · VCS Version 4 was released on 19 September 2019
     · VCS Version 5 was released on 16 December 2025

2.3 VCS Program Scope

The VCS Program provides principles and requirements for designing projects that reduce GHG
emissions or remove carbon dioxide. It forms the basis of their independent validation and verification.

The scope of the VCS Program covers all activities related to reductions in the seven Kyoto Protocol
greenhouse gases and ozone-depleting substances (ODS) and removals of carbon dioxide which are
established in conformance to:

     · eligible methodologies approved for use in the VCS Program, and

     · the VCS Program rules, including the Jurisdictional and Nested REDD+ (JNR) Requirements for
          jurisdictional REDD+ programs and nested REDD+ projects.

The scope of the VCS Program does not include carbon footprint assessments or corporate emissions
claims.

2.4 VCS Sectoral Scopes

The VCS sectoral scopes provide a way to group methodologies together based on their underlying
industrial sectors or greenhouse gas (GHG) emission sources. All VCS methodologies specify the
applicable sectoral scope or scopes.3 New methodologies can be developed under any of the sectoral
scopes. The VCS sectoral scopes are primarily aligned with the Article 6.4 Paris Agreement Crediting
Mechanism (PACM) sectoral scopes.

VVBs are approved to audit projects under specific sectoral scopes based on their technical expertise,
qualifications, and other competencies. The Verra website provides a list of VVBs and their respective
sectoral scope approvals.

VCS Sectoral Scopes

     1. Energy supply
     2. Energy distribution
     3. Energy demand

Ken Newcombe, Mark Proegler, Robert Routliffe, Richard Samans, Marc Stuart, Einar Telnes, Bill Townsend and
Diane Wittenberg.
3 CDM and PACM also specify the sectoral scopes that apply to their methodologies. Verra provides a list of which
VCS sectoral scopes are equivalent to the defined CDM and PACM sectoral scopes.

                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                      2 Overview of the VCS Program

     4. Manufacturing industries
     5. Chemical industries
     6. Construction
     7. Transport
     8. Mining and mineral production
     9. Metal production
     10. Fugitive emissions from fuels (solid, liquid, and gas)
     11. Fugitive emissions from industrial gases (halocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride)
     12. Solvents use
     13. Waste handling and disposal
     14. Forestry and other land use (forests, wetlands, and grasslands)
     15. Agriculture
     16. Geological carbon storage
     17. Other engineered removals
     18. Oceans and marine resources

Where the VCS Program documents and templates refer to requirements that only apply to certain
sectors, the terms used align with the sectoral scopes as described in Table 2.

Table 2. Commonly used sectoral groupings

Term                                        Sectoral scopes included

Energy and industry (E&I) projects          1­13 and 17

Agriculture, forestry, and other land use (AFOLU) projects 14 and 15

Geological carbon storage (GCS) projects    16

Oceans and marine resources (OMR) projects  18

2.5 Program Documents

The rules and requirements for the VCS Program are set out in the program documents. Projects,
programs, and methodologies shall meet all the applicable rules and requirements set out in these
documents.

The structure of the program documents is summarized in Diagram 1. The VCS Program Guide is the
overarching program document, providing the rules and requirements governing the VCS Program and
further describing the constituent parts of the program such as the project and program registration
process, the Verra Registry system, and the accreditation requirements for VVBs. Complementing the
VCS Program Guide are requirements documents, procedural documents, and templates and forms.
Verra may issue new documents, as developments in the VCS Program require, and the complete and
current list of the program documents is available on the Verra website.

                                                                                                                                    8
                              2 Overview of the VCS Program

Diagram 1. Program documents

In addition to the VCS Program Guide, the program documents currently include the following:
     1) Requirements Documents
          a) VCS Standard. Provides the requirements for developing projects and for the validation and
               verification process.
          b) Methodology Requirements. Provides the requirements for developing new, revised, and
               consolidated methodologies, tools, and modules.

                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                       2 Overview of the VCS Program

          c) JNR Requirements. Provides further requirements for developing jurisdictional REDD+
               programs and nested REDD+ projects.

          d) Program Definitions. Provides the definitions for terms used in the VCS Program
               documents.

          e) Verra Program Fee Schedule. Provides the fees related to the various parts of the VCS
               Program and all other Verra programs.

          f) Geological Carbon Storage Requirements. Provides the requirements for developing
               geological carbon storage projects.

     2) Procedural Documents

          a) Registration and Issuance Process. Provides the procedures and rules for registering
               projects and issuing VCUs.

          b) JNR Registration and Issuance Process. Provides the procedures and rules for registering
               jurisdictional baselines and jurisdictional REDD+ programs, as well as projects nested in
               jurisdictional programs and standalone projects operating under the JNR Scenario 1
               Requirements.

          c) JNR Validation and Verification Process. Provides the process and requirements for the
               validation and verification of jurisdictional baselines and jurisdictional REDD+ programs.

          d) Methodology Development and Review Process. Provides the procedures and rules for the
               development and review of new or revised VCS methodologies, tools, and modules.

          e) Procedure for Applying the AFOLU Non-Permanence Risk Tool. Provides the procedure for
               conducting non-permanence risk analysis and buffer determination for AFOLU projects.

          f) Procedure for Applying the GCS Non-Permanence Risk Tool. Provides the procedures for
               assessing the non-permanence risk and buffer determination required for Geological
               Carbon Storage (GCS) projects.

     3) Templates and Forms
          a) VCS Program Templates. Templates for project descriptions, validation reports, monitoring
               reports, verification reports, and methodologies.
          b) Representations Templates. Templates for deeds of representation made by project
               proponents and VVBs.
          c) Forms. Forms such as for VVBs to notify Verra that they are conducting
               validation/verification services .

The following are normative (referenced) documents for the VCS Program:
     1) ISO 14064-2, Greenhouse gases ­ Part 2: Specification with guidance at the project level for
          quantification, monitoring, and reporting of greenhouse gas emission reductions or removal
          enhancements.

                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                       2 Overview of the VCS Program

     2) ISO 14064-3, Greenhouse gases ­ Part 3: Specification with guidance for the verification and
          validation of greenhouse gas statements.

     3) ISO 14065, Greenhouse gases ­ Requirements for greenhouse gas validation and verification
          bodies for use in accreditation or other forms of recognition.

     4) The GHG Protocol for Project Accounting (Chapter 7, guidance related to additionality and
          common practice), WRI, 2005.

The four standards above are part of the requirements of the VCS Program, and their requirements
shall be met either by the project proponent (ISO 14064-2) or the VVB (ISO 14064-3 and ISO 14065).
Where there is any conflict between VCS Program documentation and the above normative references,
the VCS Program documentation takes precedence.

The program documents are also complemented by guidance documents. These guidance documents
do not set out VCS Program rules and requirements, but they provide additional information to assist
with the interpretation of the rules and requirements. It is strongly encouraged that such guidance is
followed.

2.6 Roles and Responsibilities

2.6.1 Project and Jurisdictional Proponents

Project and jurisdictional proponents are the entities with overall control and responsibility for projects
or programs. A project may have one project or jurisdictional proponent, or there may be multiple
project or jurisdictional proponents who collectively have overall control and responsibility for a project
or program. Project and jurisdictional proponents establish and operate projects and programs in
accordance with the VCS Program rules. They are responsible for providing the project or program
description, monitoring report, and supporting documentation (including evidence of right to operate) to
facilitate validation and verification.

Project and jurisdictional proponents sign unilateral representations with respect to their projects or
programs and VCUs, and these are made available on the Verra Registry. Project proponents assume
limited liability for the replacement of excess VCUs, as set out in Section 4.2.
Note ­ To aid the readability of the VCS Program documentation, the documents use project and
jurisdictional proponent in the singular. For projects and programs with multiple project or jurisdictional
proponents, "project proponents" or "jurisdictional proponents" should be substituted in place of "project
proponent" or "jurisdictional proponent", as appropriate.

2.6.2 Validation/Verification Bodies (VVBs)

VVBs are accredited to validate projects and verify GHG emission reductions and carbon dioxide
removals. They are only eligible to carry out work for the sectoral scopes for validation and verification
for which they hold accreditation and must sign the required agreement with Verra before they can
perform validation or verification in connection with the VCS Program.

                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                       2 Overview of the VCS Program

The list of VVBs is available on the Verra website.

2.6.3 Verra Registry

The Verra Registry is responsible for ensuring that all required project and program documents have
been submitted to Verra; issuing and maintaining accounts of VCUs for accountholders; ensuring the
seamless flow of VCUs throughout the entire Verra Registry system; tracking and reporting the
deposit/withdrawal of buffer credits to/from the centrally managed AFOLU pooled buffer account and
jurisdictional pooled buffer account; and maintaining custody and records of VCU legal ownership.

2.6.4 VCU Buyers, Sellers, and Brokers

Buyers, sellers, and brokers are companies, organizations, or individuals who transact VCUs or
facilitate the transaction of VCUs.

2.6.5 Verra

The VCS Program is managed by Verra, which is an independent, non-profit organization incorporated
under the laws of the District of Columbia in the United States. Verra is responsible for managing,
overseeing, and developing the program. It maintains an impartial position in the market and does not
develop projects or JNR REDD+ programs, nor does it provide validation or verification services.
One of Verra's roles is in respect of overseeing and ensuring the integrity of projects, programs, and
VCUs in the Verra Registry system. Verra conducts reviews of project and program registration and
verification requests. Verra is also responsible for overseeing the VVBs operating under the VCS
Program.
Verra's review of projects is conducted in accordance with the Registration and Issuance Process. The
review ensures that the VVB has appropriately assessed, and fully described how it has assessed, the
project's conformance to the VCS Program rules. Reviews do not replace validation or verification.

Verra also conducts other types of VVB reviews. These include, but are not limited to, desk reviews of
the VVB work, visits to the VVB offices, witnessing the VVB undertaking audits (in person and remotely),
and reviewing work products developed by the VVB in performing the audits.
Where Verra identifies shortcomings in a VVB's performance, Verra provides feedback and requires the
VVB to address non-conformities. Verra also reports VVB performance to the respective accreditation
body.

Verra reserves the right to take action against VVBs and implement sanctions in accordance with the
provisions set out in the agreements signed with Verra (see Section 6). The rights and obligations for
VVBs are set out in such agreements.

Verra reserves the right not to list projects, register projects and programs, or issue VCUs where it
deems that they do not conform to the VCS Program rules or may otherwise impact the integrity of the
VCS Program or the functioning of the broader carbon market. Verra reserves the right to cancel VCUs
or to reject, put on hold, or inactivate projects where it deems that they have not been registered or

                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                       2 Overview of the VCS Program
issued in conformance to the VCS Program rules. At listing, Verra may deny the request and/or reject
the project where the listing request is frivolous, vexatious, or an abuse of process. Verra makes the
reasons for such decisions publicly available on the project page on the registry.
Verra also leads the methodology development and review process. It may choose not to accept
methodologies into the process and to put on hold or reject methodologies that are in the process.
Verra may review, revise, or set as inactive previously active methodologies where they do not conform
to the VCS Program rules, would sanction politically or ethically contentious project activities, or may
otherwise impact the integrity of the VCS Program or the functioning of the broader carbon market.
Verra may convene steering committees, advisory committees, or working groups to support its work in
specific areas. These groups draw in expertise from outside the organization to develop and support
specific elements of the VCS Program. A full list of steering committees and working groups is available
on the Verra website.

                                                                                                                                  13
                                   3 VCU Attributes

3 VCU ATTRIBUTES

VCUs issued in the VCS Program embody the attributes set out in Table 3. The VCS Program rules are
designed to ensure that all VCUs share these attributes. Project proponents and VVBs ensure the same
by developing and auditing projects in conformance to the VCS Program rules.

Table 3. VCU attributes

Attribute               Description

Additional              Reductions and removals exceed what would be achieved under a business-as-
                        usual scenario and would not have occurred in the absence of the incentive
                        provided by carbon markets.

Durable                 Where reductions and removals carry a risk of reversal, safeguards are in place to
                        minimize reversal risk and address underlying conditions that may lead to reversals
                        over the longer of the project longevity and project crediting period. Any reversals of
                        reductions or removals that have been credited are accounted, reported, and where
                        possible, replaced.

Independently verified  Reductions and removals are independently verified by an accredited VVB with
                        appropriate expertise for the project location and sector.

Traceable and not       VCUs are transparently recorded and tracked in the Verra Registry to ensure credits
double counted          are identified securely, uniquely, and unambiguously. Traceability ensures that
                        VCUs are not double issued, double claimed, or double used.

Robustly quantified     Reductions and removals are robustly quantified in conformance to VCS Program
                        rules and methodologies and guided by the VCS Program principles.

Participatory-based     Stakeholders are actively engaged throughout project design and implementation,
                        including through seeking free, prior, and informed consent. Accessible and
                        effective mechanisms allow stakeholders to raise concerns and submit complaints.

Safeguarded from        Projects are designed and implemented to assess and mitigate risks of negative
unmitigated harm
                        impacts on people and the environment, uphold human rights and Indigenous
                        Peoples' rights including to just compensation, and promote equity.

Aligned with sustainable Project activities are designed to deliver positive sustainable development

development goals       outcomes.

Aligned with net zero   Project activities avoid locking in GHG emissions and activities or technologies that
transition              are incompatible with achieving net zero GHG emissions by mid-century.

                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                               4 Verra Registry

4 VERRA REGISTRY

The Verra Registry provides the public interface to all project, program, and VCU information. VCU serial
numbers are generated by the registry, which ensures the uniqueness of projects, programs, and VCUs.
In addition, the Verra Registry provides full transparency on project and program documentation,
together with information on the project and jurisdictional proponents, VCU issuance and retirement,
the AFOLU and GCS pooled buffer accounts, and the jurisdictional pooled buffer account.
The AFOLU and GCS pooled buffer accounts hold non-tradable buffer credits to cover the non-
permanence risk associated with AFOLU and GCS projects, respectively. The accounts are subject to
periodic reconciliation, as set out in the VCS Standard. Likewise, the jurisdictional pooled buffer
account holds the non-tradable buffer credits to cover the non-permanence risk associated with
jurisdictional REDD+ programs and nested projects.
The Verra Registry provides accountholder services and is the entry point into the registry system for
project and jurisdictional proponents, and VCU buyers and sellers. Such market participants open an
account with the Verra Registry and project and program registration and VCU issuance is initiated with
the Verra Registry.
The Verra Registry is responsible for: ensuring that projects and programs are registered and VCUs are
issued in accordance with the VCS Program rules; providing services for holding, transferring, and
retiring VCUs; managing AFOLU and jurisdictional buffer credits; and providing custodial services for
VCUs and maintaining records of VCU legal ownership.
Project and jurisdictional proponents (or other eligible entities, as set out in the Registration and
Issuance Process and JNR Registration and Issuance Process) request listing and registration of
projects and programs and VCU issuance, with the Verra Registry. Diagram 2 outlines the project life
cycle and registration process, which is similar to the program life cycle and registration process. Once
the project or program has been validated and the GHG emission reductions or carbon dioxide
removals verified, the project or jurisdictional proponent submits the relevant documents to the Verra
Registry. Verra conducts a completeness review of the documents and may conduct a further accuracy
review to assess conformance to the VCS Program rules. Where it is determined that the project or
program conforms to the VCS Program rules, Verra uploads the documents to the public Verra Registry
and issues VCUs into the project or jurisdictional proponent's account. Note that validation and
verification may be undertaken simultaneously, with registration and issuance of the VCUs occurring at
the same time, or validation may occur before verification, with registration occurring before any
subsequent issuance of VCUs.

                                                                                                                                  15
                                                        4 Verra Registry

Diagram 2. Project life cycle and registration process

                                                        16
                                                                                                               4 Verra Registry
The process and detailed rules and requirements for project pipeline listing, program listing, project,
and program registration, and VCU issuance are set out in the Registration and Issuance Process and
JNR Registration and Issuance Process.

4.1 VCS Program Fees

Verra charges fees to cover administration costs, at the rates set out in the Verra Program Fee
Schedule.

4.2 VCU Liability and Statute of Limitations

Registered projects and issued VCUs are subject to review by Verra, as set out in the Registration and
Issuance Process. Project proponents are responsible for compensating for excess VCU issuance where
Verra deems, acting reasonably, that there has been a material erroneous issuance of VCUs in respect
of a project, as a result of the fraudulent conduct, negligence, intentional act, recklessness,
misrepresentation, or mistake of the project proponent. A statute of limitations applies, whereby Verra
can only require such compensation up to the later of:

     1) 6 years after the date of issuance of the relevant VCU; or
     2) 12 months after the date upon which any subsequent verification report with respect to the

          relevant VCU is accepted on the Verra Registry.4

4 The relevant VCU will be issued following acceptance of a verification report for a project. For some types of
AFOLU projects in particular, verification cycles may be longer than 6 years. In this regard, if the subsequent
verification report shows a VCU has been erroneously issued, Verra will have an additional 12 months to deal with
that issue. Note also that where a VCU is erroneously issued from the last verification report of a project, Section
4.2(1) applies.

                                                                                                                                  17
                                                                                                 5 VCS Program Approval

5 VCS PROGRAM APPROVAL

VVBs are eligible to provide validation and verification services under the VCS Program where they:
     1) are accredited by an accreditation body that is a member of the International Accreditation
          Forum (IAF) and granted recognition for IAF Multilateral Recognition Arrangement (MLA) under
          ISO 17029 and/or 14065.
     2) are approved by Verra and listed as an active VVB on Verra's website.
     3) have signed the required agreement with Verra.

The VVB for a project shall hold such accreditation and Verra approval for validation or verification (as
applicable) for the sectoral scope applicable to the methodology applied to the project. Where the
methodology falls under more than one sectoral scope, the VVB shall hold accreditation or approval for
validation or verification (as applicable) for all relevant sectoral scopes.
Where the VVB holds such accreditation and Verra approval for the verification of the relevant sectoral
scopes but does not hold accreditation or approval for validation, it may validate project description
deviations and inclusion of new project activity instances in grouped projects at the time of verification
where all of the following are true:

      1) The VVB holds accreditation and Verra approval for validation in at least one other sectoral
           scope.

      2) The VVB has completed validation of at least five projects under the VCS Program that have
           been registered with the VCS Program.

      3) The validation activity does not entail validation of a project description deviation that impacts
           the applicability of the methodology, additionality, or the appropriateness of the baseline
           scenario (see the VCS Standard for further information on such deviations).

To apply to become an approved VVB with the VCS Program, organizations must complete a Verra
Validation/Verification Body Application Form and submit the signed application, along with any
supporting evidence (as required by the application) to auditing@verra.org.
A list of accredited VVBs that are Verra-approved to undertake validation and verification services
under the VCS Program is available on the Verra website.

                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                          6 Validation/Verification Body Sanctions

6 VALIDATION/VERIFICATION BODY
  SANCTIONS

Based on its oversight activities, Verra has sole discretion to apply sanctions that vary according to the
severity of issues and/or non-conformance(s) where VVBs are:

     1) Found by Verra to be conducting services not in conformance to the governing accreditation
          body and/or VCS Program rules, or

     2) Deemed by Verra to be performing poorly.
Warning Issuance

Where Verra deems sanctions are merited, it may issue a warning notice and non-conformity report to
the VVB, requiring it to undertake a root cause analysis and identify corrective actions for addressing
the identified issues. The root cause analysis and corrective action plan must be submitted to Verra
within the time frame identified in the warning and non-conformity report.
Verra reviews and assesses whether the VVB's root cause analysis and corrective action plan are
satisfactory or if additional sanctions may be applied.

Accreditation Body Referral

Verra may share the results of its VVB non-conformity reports with relevant accreditation bodies.

Suspension and Reinstatement

Verra may issue a notice of VVB suspension at any time. Where a suspension notice is issued, Verra
provides the VVB with a copy or detailed description of the evidence upon which its decision was based.
Suspension may be for the entire VCS Program, or the VVB may be suspended for specific VCS sectoral
scopes per the provisions set out in the Verra VVB Agreement.

The suspension is announced on the VCS website.
     1) Where the full VCS program scope is suspended, the VVB's approved status is changed to
          inactive
     2) Where specific scopes are suspended, the VVB status remains active, but the suspended scope
          is changed from active to suspended.

A VVB is automatically suspended where it is suspended by the accreditation body under which it holds
accreditation.

Inactive VVBs or active VVBs with specific suspended scopes are not permitted to conduct validation or
verification audits or issue any documentation (e.g., validation/verification reports) concerning the
suspended (inactive) program or specific scope(s) without Verra's prior and explicit approval.
A sectoral scope may be reactivated and/or VCS Program approval status reinstated where:

                                                                                                                                  19
                                                                     6 Validation/Verification Body Sanctions
1) the VVB demonstrates to Verra's reasonable satisfaction that:

     a) the evidence upon which such suspension was based was inaccurate or misleading, or
     b) the facts or circumstances leading to such suspension are no longer current or likely to

          affect the VVB's performance, or
     c) its suspension by the accreditation body under which it holds accreditation is lifted, and
2) the VVB has paid all VVB program and reinstatement assessment fees.

                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                              7 Grievance Redress Policy

7 GRIEVANCE REDRESS POLICY

Project proponents, VVBs, and other stakeholders (including interested stakeholders) may submit
inquiries to Verra at any time. In addition, Verra provides a grievance redress policy as set out in the
Verra Grievance Redress Policy available on the Verra website.

                                                                                                                                  21
                                                               Document History

DOCUMENT HISTORY

Version  Date     Comment

v5.0 16 Dec 2025 Updated version released under VCS Version 5

                                                               22
ABOUT VERRA

Verra sets the world's leading standards for climate action and sustainable development. We build
standards for activities as diverse as reducing deforestation, improving agricultural practices,
addressing plastic waste, and achieving gender equality. We manage programs to certify that these
activities achieve measurable high-integrity outcomes. We work with governments, businesses, and civil
society to advance the use of these standards, including through the development of markets.
Everything we do is in service of increasingly ambitious climate and sustainable development goals,
and an accelerated transition to a sustainable future.
Verra's certification programs include the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) Program and its Jurisdictional
and Nested REDD+ (JNR) framework, the Climate, Community & Biodiversity Standards (CCBS)
Program, the Sustainable Development Verified Impact Standard (SD VISta) Program, and the Plastic
Waste Reduction Program.

                                                                                                                                  23
