                 CORRECTIONS & CLARIFICATIONS

CORRECTIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS TO
VM0042 IMPROVED AGRICULTURAL LAND

                MANAGEMENT, v2.2

                            Publication date: 11 June 2026

This document provides corrections and clarifications applicable to VCS methodology VM0042
Improved Agricultural Land Management, v2.2. Such corrections and clarifications are effective on
their issuance date. Project proponents and validation/verification bodies (VVBs) shall apply and
interpret VM0042, v2.2 consistent with the corrections and clarifications set out in this document.

These updates will be incorporated into the next issued version of the methodology.

Correction/      Description                                                 Section Reference
Clarification

Clarification 1  The baseline scenario justification in Appendix 3 has been
                 confirmed to apply for improved ALM in general and project
                 proponents need not replicate the analysis for their        Section 6 Baseline Scenario
                 projects

Clarification 2 The qualitative specifications of crop planting and          Section 6 Baseline Scenario
                      harvesting practices in Table 4 have been clarified.

Clarification 3 Requirements for describing the baseline scenario in         Section 6 Baseline Scenario
                      grouped projects have been clarified.

Clarification 4 Acceptable transparent and verifiable evidence for Step 2
                                                                                                        Section 7 Additionality

                      Barrier Analysis under VT0008 has been specified.

Clarification 5  Application of Step 4c of VT0008 to demonstrate that a
                 proposed project activity is not common practice has been
                 clarified.                                                  Section 7 Additionality

Clarification 6 The interplay between quantification units and eligibility   Section 8.1 Summary
                      areas under VCS Standard, v5.0 has been clarified.

                                                                                                                                 1
Clarification 7  A change in analytical laboratory is allowed when            Section 8.2.1.4 Measurements of
                 transitioning to an eligible analytical method to determine  SOC Content
                 SOC content per Appendix 4.

Correction 1 The unit for parameter VSl,i,t,P has been corrected.             Section 8.2.7 Methane Emissions
                                                                              from Manure Deposition

Clarification 8 The five-year remeasurement requirement under                 Section 8.3 Project Emissions
                      Quantification Approach 2 has been clarified.

Correction 2     The parameter description in Equation (36) for parameter     Section 8.4.3 Accounting for
                 LKdisp,t has been corrected.                                 Leakage from Production
                                                                              Declines

Correction 3     The missing parameter for leakage from production
                 declines as displaced production (LKdisp,t) has been added
                 to equations summing leakage emissions allocated to          Section 8.5 Net Reductions and
                 reductions (Equation (39)) and removals (Equation (42)).     Removals

Clarification 9  The interplay between timing requirements for adding         Section 8.6.1.3 Remeasurement,
                 project activity instances over time, remeasurement          Model True-Up and Cumulative
                 intervals, options for back-modeling, and updates to the     Modeling
                 model validation report has been clarified.

1 CLARIFICATION 1

Clarification:
The first paragraph of Section 6 must be read as follows:

   6 BASELINE SCENARIO

   Considering current market trends, existing government policies and legal requirements,
   socioeconomic conditions, and technological developments in the agriculture sector, the
   continuation of pre-project ALM practices is determined to be the most plausible baseline scenario
   for all projects implementing improved ALM following VM0042, (see as further justification
   justified in Appendix 3). The justification in Appendix 3 is generally applicable to all projects;
   project proponents are not required to use the framework of Appendix 3 to justify that the
   continuation of pre-project ALM practices is the baseline scenario for their project.

                                                                              2
Background:

Appendix 3 provides a justification at the methodology level for the continuation of pre-project ALM
practices as the most plausible baseline scenario for improved ALM under VM0042. The methodology
does not require project proponents to replicate this analysis for each individual project or set of
proposed project activities.

2 CLARIFICATION 2

Clarification:
Table 4 must be read as follows:

6 BASELINE SCENARIO

[...]

       Table 4: Minimum specifications for ALM practices in the baseline scenario

       ALM Practice            Qualitative                       Quantitative

       Crop Planting and       · Crop type(s) (e.g., crop        · Approximate date(s) planted (where
       Harvesting                  functional group(s))              applicable)

       Nitrogen Fertilizer     · Crop rotation (Y/N)             · Approximate date(s)
       Application             · Cover crops (Y/N)                   harvested/terminated (where
                               · Intercropping (Y/N)                 applicable)

                               · Manure (Y/N)                    · Crop yield (where applicable)
                               · Compost (Y/N)
                               · Synthetic N fertilizer (Y/N)    · Manure type application rate (where
                                                                     applicable)
       Tillage and/or Residue  · Tillage (Y/N)
       Management              · Crop residue removal (Y/N)      · Compost type application rate
                                                                     (where applicable)
       Water                   · Irrigation (Y/N)
       Management/Irrigation   · Flooding (Y/N)                  · N application rate in synthetic
                                                                     fertilizer (where applicable)

                                                                 · Depth of tillage (where applicable)
                                                                 · Frequency of tillage (where

                                                                     applicable)
                                                                 · Percent of soil area disturbed

                                                                     (where applicable)
                                                                 · Percent of crop residue removed

                                                                     (where applicable)

                                                                 · Irrigation rate (where applicable)

       Grazing Practices       · Grazing (Y/N)                   · Animal stocking rate (i.e., number of
                               · Animal type (where applicable)      animals and length of time grazing
                               · Harvesting/mowing (Y/N)             in each area annually, where
                                                                     applicable)

                                                                 · Frequency of harvest

                                                                                   3
ALM Practice  Qualitative                       Quantitative
Liming
               · Application of calcitic         · Calcitic limestone or dolomite
                   limestone or dolomite (Y/N)       application rate (where applicable)

Background:
Qualitative specifications of crop planting and harvesting practices featured in Table 4 for describing
baseline scenario ALM practices have been further explained.

3 CLARIFICATION 3

Clarification:
Section 6 must be read as:

   6 BASELINE SCENARIO

   [...]

   For each quantification unit (e.g., for each field), baseline scenario practices are set to match the
   practices implemented in the historical look-back period, creating an annual schedule of activities
   to be repeated throughout the first baseline period.8 Baseline emissions/stock changes are then
   modeled (Quantification Approach 1) or (for SOC stock change only) directly measured in baseline
   control sites subject to the annual schedule of activities (Quantification Approach 2). Note that
   under Quantification Approach 1, direct SOC stock estimates are also required at time t = 0 years
   to serve as model input for model initialization.9 The crops and practices assumed in the baseline
   scenario must be reassessed every ten years in accordance with the requirements of the most
   recent version of the VCS Standard and revised, where necessary, to reflect current agricultural
   production in the region.10 However, where regional production practices change and/or data
   becomes available across shorter timeframes, it is recommended to reassess the baseline every
   five years.

   Project proponents must describe the baseline scenario for the project area by specifying whether
   the land is either cropland or grassland at the project start date and providing a comprehensive

8 For example, where the schedule of activities includes tillage events in years t = -3 and -1 but does not involve
tillage in year t = -2, the schedule of activities for tillage in the baseline scenario would be tillage, no tillage, tillage.
This pattern would be repeated as follows for the first baseline period: tillage, no tillage, tillage, tillage, no tillage,
tillage, tillage, no tillage, tillage, tillage.
9 Per Table 6, baseline SOC stocks may be (back-)modeled to t = 0 from measurements collected within ±5 years of
t = 0.
10 See Section 3.2.7 of the VCS Standard, v4.7.

                                                                                                                               4
   qualitative description of pre-project ALM practices, covering the categories listed in Table 4. The
   range of variations observed in all initial project activity instances within the project area must be
   described.
   Project proponents must also identify the specific baseline practices that will be impacted by
   implementation of the proposed project activity or activities.
   For grouped projects, the baseline scenario must be described for each eligibility area.11a All
   observed qualitative variations in the specifications of each ALM practice within each eligibility
   area must be described. Different land classifications as cropland or grassland must be treated as
   separate eligibility areas as these reflect distinct baseline conditions.
   At future verifications, additional project activity instances may be enrolled. Such instances may
   exhibit different pre-project ALM practices, provided that at least one of the pre-project ALM
   practices impacted by project activities in the new instance matches the validated baseline
   scenario.
   Box 2 provides an example of how to describe the baseline scenario of a grouped project in the
   project description, and how to determine eligibility of new project activity instances joining the
   eligibility area after validation, based on a hypothetical project.

11a Or geographic area per VCS Standard, v4.7 and previous versions

                                                                                                                               5
Box 2: Example of baseline scenario description and eligibility of new project activity instances for a grouped project

A hypothetical grouped project is implemented on cropland among smallholder farmers in the Ethiopian highlands. The
proposed project activities are:

   1) introduction of legume intercropping (e.g., maize intercropped with common bean or pigeon pea),
   2) implementation of no-tillage to improve soil organic carbon and productivity, and
   3) implementation of integrated soil fertility management (ISFM) encompassing judicious use of mineral and synthetic

      fertilizers, and liming every four years.

The baseline scenario is described in the project description as shown in Table B2, covering the specifications listed in
Table 4.

Table B2. Baseline scenario description for eligibility area 1 (EA1) ­ cropland, to be included in project description

Pre-project ALM      Qualitative description                                  Project activity impact
practice
                                                                              Yes. Project activity introduces
Crop planting and    Annual food crops (e.g., maize, sorghum, millet).        intercropping leguminous cover crops
harvesting           Cereal­cereal or cereal­legume rotation. Minimal         (project activity 1).
                     soil cover following harvest; no systematic cover
                                                                              Yes. Project activity introduces ISFM
                     cropping.                                                (project activity 3).
                                                                              Yes. Project activity implements no-
Nitrogen fertilizer  Very low or no mineral and synthetic fertilizer;         tillage (project activity 2).
application          occasional use of farmyard manure
                                                                              No
Tillage and residue  Manual or animal drawn conventional tillage or
management           reduced tillage (e.g., disk tillage) prior to planting.  No
                     Crop residues partially retained or removed for use
                     as cooking fuel.                                         Yes. Project activity applies lime every
                                                                              four years (project activity 3).
Water management / None (rainfed systems)
irrigation

Grazing practices    Postharvest free grazing of household livestock
                     (cattle, sheep, goats)

Liming               None

                                                                              6
New project activity instances may be added to EA1 in this hypothetical project when at least one pre-project ALM
practice impacted by project activities aligns with the validated baseline scenario, and the land is cropland.
The following project activity instances would be eligible for inclusion in EA1 despite differences to the validated
baseline scenario practices (marked in bold):

     a) Annual food crops (e.g., maize, sorghum, millet). Cereal­cereal or cereal­legume rotation. Minimal soil cover
          following harvest; no systematic cover cropping. No mineral and synthetic fertilizer; occasional use of
          farmyard manure. Strip tillage. Crop residues removed. Rainfed. Post-harvest free grazing. No liming.
          Eligible for inclusion in EA1 as all project activities are planned for implementation.

     b) Annual food crops (e.g., maize, sorghum, millet). Cereal­cereal or cereal­legume rotation. Minimal soil cover
          following harvest; no systematic cover cropping. Low NPK application rates; occasional use of farmyard
          manure. Animal-drawn conventional tillage. Crop residues removed. Traditional furrow irrigation. Post-harvest
          free grazing. No liming.
          Eligible for inclusion in EA1 as all project activities are planned for implementation.

     c) Annual food crops (e.g., maize, sorghum, millet). Cereal­cereal or cereal­legume rotation. Minimal soil cover
          following harvest; no systematic cover cropping. No mineral and synthetic fertilizer; occasional use of
          farmyard manure. Strip tillage. Crop residues removed. Rainfed. Post-harvest free grazing. Liming every six
          years.
          Eligible for inclusion in EA1 as project activities 1 (legume intercropping) and 2 (no-tillage) are planned for
          implementation.

The following project activity instances would not be eligible for inclusion in EA1, because of differences to the
validated baseline scenario practices (marked in bold):

     d) Rotation of maize intercropped with common bean, barley, and vetch for controlled grazing. ISFM. No tillage.
          Crop residues retained. Rainfed. Liming every 3­5 years.
          Not eligible for inclusion in EA1 as all project activities are already part of pre-project practices.

     e) Communal grazing land. No mineral and synthetic fertilizer. No tillage. Rainfed. Post-harvest free grazing.
          Continuous grazing dominated by cattle with limited mowing. No liming.
          Not eligible for inclusion in EA1 as the land is grassland at the project start date.

                                                                                                                             7
   Development of Schedule of Activities in the Baseline Scenario
   For each quantification unit, a schedule of activities in the baseline scenario is determined by
   assessment of practices implemented during the period prior to the project start date. This forms
   the basis for calculating baseline emissions following the guidance in Section 8. The interval over
   which practices are assessed, x years, must be a minimum of three years and must include at
   least one complete crop rotation, where applicable.

Background:
To streamline project reviews and VVB audits, the additional text aims to clarify expectations related
to the content of the baseline scenario description that must be provided in project documents. The
text also clarifies how the baseline scenario description determines the eligibility of new project
activity instances.

4 CLARIFICATION 4

Clarification:
Section 7 must be read as:

   7 ADDITIONALITY

   [...]
   Step 2: Barrier analysis
   Project proponents must apply the procedures and requirements in Step 2 of the most recent
   version of VT0008 Additionality Assessment.
   For the purposes of this methodology, Step 2 of VT0008 must only be applied with respect to the
   project activity. Sub-steps that require assessment of the alternative scenarios described in
   Appendix 3 in this methodology need not be applied.
   When applying Requirement 1 in Appendix 1 of VT0008, project proponents must provide publicly
   available, transparent, and verifiable evidence relevant to the project area and the proposed
   project activities, such as:

         1) agricultural census or other government (e.g., survey) data;
         2) peer-reviewed scientific literature;
         3) independent reports, assessments, or datasets issued by recognized international

              institutions or multilateral organizations (e.g., the World Bank, FAO, WBCSD);

                                                                                                                               8
         4) independent research data (i.e., empirical data or analyses produced by universities,
              public research institutes, or non-profit research organizations using documented and
              reproducible methods), where the data provider has no direct financial, operational, or
              governance relationship with the project entity; or

         5) reports or assessments compiled by industry associations.
Background:
To resolve confusion among project proponents and VVBs, it is clarified that the barrier analysis per
Step 2 of VT0008 must focus only on the proposed project activity. To streamline project reviews and
VVB audits, the clarification lists acceptable sources of evidence for the barrier analysis.

5 CLARIFICATION 5

Clarification:
Section 7 must be read as:

   7 ADDITIONALITY

   [...]
   Step 3: Demonstrate that adoption of proposed individual or combined project activities is not
   common practice
   Project proponents must determine whether the proposed project is common practice in each
   region (or `geographic area' as defined for grouped projects in the VCS Standard) included within
   the project area. A project region for demonstrating common practice must be defined by
   stratifying the project area to the state or provincial level (or equivalent second-order jurisdiction)
   in the countries where the project is being developed. For grouped projects, the region to be
   considered is the "geographic area" (VCS Standard, v4.7 and previous versions) or "eligibility area"
   (VCS Standard, v5.0).
   [...]
   Step 3.2: Where the best available data from the above sources for an individual or combined
   practice determines that the adoption rate is greater than 20% or the required data is not
   available, project proponents must demonstrate that the activity is not common practice by
   applying Step 4c of VT0008. This step involves identifying essential distinctions between the
   proposed project activity (i.e., an individual or combined practice) and related similar activities that
   may be captured under per Step 3.1 show an adoption rate higher than 20%. When applying Step
   4c of VT0008, the information sources for Nall and Ndiff must cover the same geographic area (i.e.,
   the project region as defined in the introductory paragraph to Step 3

                                                                                                                               9
                CORRECTIONS & CLARIFICATIONS

     13

   a.), and t The analysis must be based on a the land area basis (e.g., hectares) encompassing
   implementation of the similar activity, rather than the number of projects. The requirement that
   Nall - Ndiff must be greater than 3 is not applicable.
   For example, a project intends to introduce cover crops as a project activity in the project region
   where the adoption rate per the government agricultural census is 22% covering approximately
   2 million hectares (Nall). Applying the common practice analysis per Step 4c of VT0008, the project
   identifies the following essential distinction: government subsidies for cover crop seed are
   accessed by farmers managing 1.7 million hectares (Ndiff) in the project region. The calculation of
   factor F (F = 1 - Ndiff / Nall) per Step 4c of VT0008 would therefore yield 15% (F = 1 - 1.7 million
   hectares / 2 million hectares = 0.15), demonstrating that the proposed project activity is not
   considered common practice.

Background:
To resolve confusion among project proponents and VVBs, it is clarified that the project region must
be stratified for the entire common practice analysis and that the analysis applying Step 4c of
VT0008 must be based on land area and not on number of projects implementing similar activities.

6 CLARIFICATION 6

Clarification:
Section 8.1 must be read as:

   8.1 Summary

   [...]
   The entire project area is divided into multiple quantification units that must be demonstrated to
   be more homogenous than the project area in its entirety, for the purposes of estimating emission
   reductions and removals (ERRs) (i.e., similar management activities, soil type, climate). In some
   cases, the entire project area may be considered as one quantification unit. When dividing the
   project area into multiple quantification units, E estimates of ERRs for each quantification unit
   within the project area are then aggregated to produce an estimate for the entire project area. In a
   staged (i.e., hierarchical, nested) design, additional units nested within a primary quantification
   unit may be implemented resulting in primary, secondary, tertiary, etc. quantification units (see

13a The requirements of Section 5.1 of VT0008 to determine an `applicable geographic area' do not apply.

                                                                                                                             10
Appendix 6 for an example). Quantification units must be clearly defined in the description of the
sampling design provided in the project description document.

In grouped projects, the determination of different eligibility areas15a may be treated
independently from potential division into quantification units. Thus, quantification units may span
across multiple eligibility areas or represent subdivisions of one eligibility area.

Background:

To resolve confusion among project proponents and VVBs, it is clarified that the optional division of
the project area into quantification units is independent from the determination of eligibility areas in
grouped projects per the VCS Standard, v5.0 (or geographic areas in previous versions of the VCS
Standard).

7 CLARIFICATION 7

Clarification:

Section 8.2.1.4 must be read as:

8.2.1.4  Measurements of SOC Content

[...]

The selection of an analytical laboratory should be based on its listing as an approved analytical
service provider of SOC measurements according to national and/or international
standards/accreditation. Where possible, the selected analytical laboratory should be ISO/IEC
17025 accredited. All samples throughout the entire project lifetime should be analyzed in the
same laboratory. A change of analytical laboratory requires justification. The project proponent
must ensure that soil analysis methods and procedures remain consistent even if there is a
change of laboratory. Where the project adopts a new eligible method when adopting a new
version of the methodology (e.g., a proximal sensing method per Appendix 4), project proponents
or their technical service providers must demonstrate the comparability of previous
measurements with new remeasurements, and, where necessary, justify the use of conversion
factors.

Background:

As part of the continuous improvement of VM0042, revisions have expanded the eligible methods to
measure and estimate soil organic carbon (SOC). The added provisions clarify that projects are

15a Geographic area per VCS Standard, v4.7 and previous versions

                                                                                                                             11
allowed to adopt new eligible methods where the project proponent demonstrates that results remain
comparable over time.

8 CORRECTION 1

Correction:
The following changes must be made to Section 8.2.7:

8.2.7  Methane Emissions from Manure Deposition

[...]

       VSl,i,t,P  = Average volatile solids excretion per head for livestock type l in
                           quantification unit i for productivity system P in year t (kg volatile
                           solids/(head × day)

Background:

The unit of parameter VSl,i,t,P in Equation (12) incorrectly included "× day." This unit is not required as
values are already multiplied across the whole year when calculated using Equation (13).

9 CLARIFICATION 8

Clarification:

The following additions must be made to Section 8.3:

   8.3 Project Emissions

   [...]
   Quantification Approach 2

   Quantification Approach 2 is used to estimate emissions from SOC stocks only.
   Remeasurements in both baseline control sites and the project area must be conducted at least
   every five years, or prior to each verification event where verification occurs more frequently.
   SOC stocks in the project scenario (SOCwp,i,t) are calculated on an equivalent soil mass (ESM)
   basis by multiplication with the SOC content in each quantification unit or stratum at time t-1,
   directly measured in each sample field. Where bulk density is measured in a fixed depth
   approach, mass corrections may be applied to meet the ESM requirement.
   [...]

                                                                                                   12
Background:

A clarification was added elucidating that the remeasurement frequency of five years is applicable
to both baseline and project scenarios under Quantification Approach 2.

10 CORRECTION 2

Correction:

The following changes must be made to Section 8.4.3:

8.4.3 Accounting for Leakage from Production Declines

     [...]

4) Use the outcome of Equation (10) from VMD0054, v1.0 to quantify annual leakage from
     displaced production as follows:

,         =  MAX(0,   - )                              (36)
                     

Where:       = Leakage emissions from livestock displacement displaced production
LKdisp,t         in year t (t CO2e)

LKt          = Cumulative leakage up to year t calculated using VMD0054 (t CO2e)
LKprior      = Cumulative leakage between y = 0 and the previous verification event,

years            calculated using VMD0054 (t CO2e)
             = Duration of the verification period (years)

Background:
Parameter LKdisp,t was incorrectly defined as leakage emissions from livestock displacement in year t.

11 CORRECTION 3

Correction:
The following additions must be made to Section 8.5:

   8.5 Net Reductions and Removals

          [...]
          Leakage allocated to emission reductions (LKER,t) is calculated as:

                                                       13
, =       (,  + , + ,)   ×                                                                      (39)
                             + 

Where:

LEBR,t        = Leakage emissions from the diversion of manure or crop residues
                  from baseline energy applications in year t (t CO2e)
LKdisp,t
CRt           = Leakage emissions from displaced production in year t (t CO2e)
[...]         = Estimated carbon dioxide removals in year t (t CO2e)

Leakage allocated to carbon dioxide removals (LKCR,t) is calculated as:

, =       (,  + ,  + ,)  ×                                                                      (42)
                             + 

Background:

The parameter for leakage from production declines was inadvertently omitted from the leakage
emissions equations. This correction serves to include the missing parameter in the sum of all
leakage sources and ensure reductions and removals are quantified correctly.

                                                                                                14
12 CLARIFICATION 9

Clarification:
The following changes must be made to Section 8.6.1.3:

8.6.1.3  Remeasurement, Model True-Up and Cumulative Modeling

As outlined in Section 8.3, SOC stocks must be directly remeasured every five years in the project
scenario. These data are used to re-estimate model prediction error and/or recalibrate the model
in relation to measured SOC stocks. Since the purpose of remeasurement is improvement of the
applied biogeochemical model over time, soil samples do not need to be taken from every project
activity instance (i.e., field or management unit) at every remeasurement event. In consequence,
the requirement to measure SOC stocks every five years or more frequently (see Section 8.1) does
not apply at the project activity instance-level. The stratified random sampling strategy must be
redefined as necessary to include changes in the project area (e.g., through the inclusion of new
project activity instances). The sampling error associated with not sampling each project activity
instance must be calculated accordingly.

Prior to remeasurement, model structural error during simulation of SOC stocks for initial model
validation will be based be based on data from peer-reviewed publications and available datasets
meeting the requirements detailed in Section 5.2.3 of VMD0053. Specifically, the model is used to
simulate changes in stocks from a set of selected external datasets (i.e., field trials for which data
have been previously collected). Following remeasurement (i.e., true-up sampling), data from
external datasets and remeasurement within the project area are combined to create a new
calibration/validation. If the project proponent so chooses, this dataset may be used to recalibrate
model parameters (or parameter distributions in the case of Bayesian models) in an effort to
improve model accuracy, although model recalibration is not required. Following remeasurement,
project proponents must repeat model validation procedures outlined in VMD0053, submit an
updated MVR for IME review and validation, and 34 update the model prediction error term used
in the to estimateion of the project uncertainty deduction.

Once the MVR is approved, project proponents should rerun model simulations for both the
baseline and project scenarios from t0 up to the present day and recalculate uncertainty
deductions to be applied to future credit vintages. VCUs that have been issued in previous
verifications will remain unchanged.

Figure 4a illustrates the interaction between:

· measurement (t0) and remeasurement (t1, t2, t3) campaigns,
· the timing for assessment of an updated MVR, and

                                                                                            15
      · continuous onboarding of cohorts56a of project activity instances.

   In Figure 4a, t0 denotes initial measurement, t1 and t2 denote subsequent remeasurements, and
   "cohorts" refer to groups of activity instances added over time, which may be sampled individually
   or through joint campaigns.

   The following scenarios, which all conform to VM0042 requirements, are illustrated in Figure 4a:

       A) Sequential cohorts with synchronized remeasurement:
              · Cohorts 1­3 are measured at entry (t0), one per year.
              · t1: conducted five years after Cohort 1's t0, for all cohorts (1­3).
              · t2: conducted five years after t1, for all cohorts.

       B) Sequential cohorts with staggered cohorts and joint sampling:
              · Cohorts 1­9 are measured at entry (t0), one per year.
              · t1 (Cohorts 1­5): conducted five years after Cohort 1's t0.
              · Next campaign (joint): conducted five years after t1 for Cohorts 1­5, to measure:
                    o t2 for Cohorts 1­5
                    o t1 for Cohorts 6­9

       C) Delayed remeasurement for later cohorts:
              · Same approach as B with a difference for cohorts 4 and 5.
              · Difference:
                    o Cohorts 4 and 5 are measured at entry (t0) but remeasured later than the
                         standard interval.
                    o Their t1 occurs after seven and six years, respectively (instead of shorter intervals
                         of one or two years, under joint sampling).

       D) Deferred initial sampling with back-modeling:
              · Cohorts 1­3 are not measured at entry; instead, back-modeling is used to estimate t0.
              · When Cohort 4 joins, remeasurement campaign serves as:
                    o t0 for Cohort 4
                    o t1 for Cohorts 1­3
              · Back-modeling is used to estimate t0 for Cohorts 5­8.
              · Later campaign (when Cohort 9 joins):
                    o t2 for Cohorts 1­3
                    o t1 for Cohorts 4­8
                    o t0 for Cohort 9

56a It is assumed that multiple project activity instances may be onboarded at different times during a monitoring
period. The term cohort is therefore used to refer to all instances added to a project within a given year. This differs
from the concept of a batch under the VCS Standard, v5.0, which refers to groups of instances added at a verification
event and may include one or more cohorts.

                                                                                                                             16
Figure 4a. Interplay between adding project activity instances over time, remeasurement
intervals, options for back-modeling, and updates to the MVR

Background:
The added explanations clarify how the continuous onboarding of agricultural producers and addition
of new project activity instances interact with the remeasurement and model true-up requirements as
well as the timing for revalidating the model validation report (MVR).

                                                                                                                             17
