VCS Module

VMD0054

MODULE FOR ESTIMATING LEAKAGE
FROM ARR ACTIVITIES

                                                                                     Version 1.0
                                                                         28 September 2023
                                                                          Sectoral Scope 14
                                                                                                VMD0054, v1.0

Version 1.0 of this module was developed by Terra Carbon (Scott Settelmyer, David Shoch, John Furniss,
Rebecca Dickson and Devon Ericksen) and Silvestrum Climate Associates (Igino Emmer), with
contributions from Kyle Hemes and the ABACUS working group.

                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                VMD0054, v1.0

CONTENTS

1 SOURCES ................................................................................................................. 4
2 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE ARR LEAKAGE MODULE ................................. 4
3 DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................ 4
4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS ................................................................................. 5
5 PROCEDURES .......................................................................................................... 5

   5.1 Step 1: Determine Foregone Production in Project Area ........................... 5
   5.2 Step 2: Determine the Impact of Leakage Mitigation Activities ............... 7
   5.3 Step 3: Determine Amount of New Land Brought into Production ........... 9
   5.4 Step 4: Determine Change in Carbon Stocks in New Lands Brought into

            Production........................................................................................................ 11
   5.5 Step 5: Determine Leakage Emissions ......................................................... 11
6 DATA AND PARAMETERS ..................................................................................... 12
   6.1 Data and Parameters Available at Validation .......................................... 12
   6.2 Data and Parameters Monitored ................................................................. 14
7 REFERENCES .......................................................................................................... 22
APPENDIX 1: LEAKAGE EXAMPLE .................................................................................. 24
APPENDIX 2: BACKGROUND ON DEFAULT VALUES ..................................................... 27
DOCUMENT HISTORY ...................................................................................................... 29

                                                                                                                                     3
1 SOURCES

          This module is used in conjunction with the following VCS methodology:

             · VM0047 Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation

          The following CDM tool has informed the development of this module:
               · CDM AR-TOOL15: Estimation of the increase in GHG emissions attributable to
                    displacement of pre-project agricultural activities in A/R CDM project activity, v2.0

2 SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE ARR
    LEAKAGE MODULE

          Project activities applying the methodology VM0047 Afforestation, Reforestation and
          Revegetation must use this module to estimate leakage. This module accounts for leakage
          related to the displacement of pre-project agricultural activities (including grazing) and fuelwood
          collection activities. It includes leakage caused by the baseline agent (activity-shifting leakage)
          and other actors (market leakage).

          The module estimates leakage based on two factors:
               1) Reduction in agricultural commodities or fuelwood produced in the project area; and
               2) Impact of leakage mitigation activities to enhance production outside the project area.

          The module estimates the net production in the project area replaced in the market, the amount
          of new forest lands brought into production outside the project area, and the associated carbon
          stock emissions.

3 DEFINITIONS

          In addition to the definitions set out in the latest version of the VCS Program Definitions, the
          following definitions apply to this module.

          Agricultural activity
                                                                                                VMD0054, v1.0

          Production of an agricultural commodity on agricultural land
          Agricultural commodity
          Any (part of) plant, animal or animal product, produced on agricultural land
          Fuelwood
          Includes firewood or charcoal produced from woody biomass
          Subsistence commodity
          Agricultural commodity that is not destined for commercial markets

4 APPLICABILITY CONDITIONS

          This module applies to estimating leakage emissions from ARR activities.
          Projects using this module must meet all applicability conditions of the methodology
          VM0047 Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation.

5 PROCEDURES

          The following steps must be taken to calculate leakage emissions from ARR activities. Leakage
          emissions from ARR activities must be assessed and calculated for a period of five years after the
          project start date, or project instance start date in the case of grouped projects. This is when the
          effects of leakage from displaced agricultural production are expected to occur.

5.1 Step 1: Determine Foregone Production in Project Area

          The baseline agricultural and fuelwood commodity production in the project area must be
          demonstrated using historical production records for each commodity during the chosen
          reference period. Use the following process to select historical production for each commodity.
          Part 1: Set the historical reference period
          The historical reference period is the greater of either:

               1) The 3-year period immediately preceding the project start date (or the project instance
                    start date in the case of grouped projects); or

               2) One complete crop rotation (where applicable).

          Part 2: Document commodities displaced and production
          Identify all commodities that will be displaced in the project area using historical production
          records.

                                                                                                                    5
                            VMD0054, v1.0

Then, use historical data to document the amount of production of each commodity being
displaced. Eligible types of historical production records are listed below. Data sources must be
used in the following order, if available (e.g., if two data sources are available, the data source
nearest the top of the list must be used):

1) Grower records (e.g., management logs, receipts or invoices, logs or files containing
     machine and/or sensor data); or

2) Remote sensing methods where requisite information on production can be reliably
     determined with these methods; or

3) The most recent regional (sub-national) average values derived from published census
     data; or

4) The most recent national average values derived from published census data; or

5) The most recent relevant commodity or ownership class where estimates have been
     disaggregated by those attributes and substantiated with a signed attestation from the
     farmer or landowner

6) For fuelwood production, use average above-ground biomass growth rates published by
     the IPCC applicable to the region if regional or national averages are unavailable.

Historical production data must be supported by verifiable evidence of grower records or remote
sensing data, provided that remote sensing procedures have been peer-reviewed and tested in a
similar region and for the agricultural activity displaced by the project activity.

,  =    =1 ,  ×  (1  +   )                                                                (1)
            

Where:        = Baseline production in the project area for commodity j in year t (units of
 BPj,t            production)

 pj,h         = Production in the project area for commodity j in year h of the historical
                  reference period (units of production)
 H
 rj           = Duration of historical reference period (years)
              = Annual growth rate of yield for commodity j (percent) or the default value
 t
                  (2.5 percent)
              = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date

Foregone production must be calculated for commodities that were produced in the project area
during the historical reference period. The amount of foregone production in the project area is
the difference between baseline production for each commodity produced in the project area
and the monitored production of that same commodity in the project area:

                                                                                                                      (2)
, = , - ,

                                                                                                     6
                                VMD0054, v1.0

Where:     = Foregone production in the project area for commodity j in year t (units of
FPj,t          production)
BPj,t
MPj,t      = Baseline production in the project area for commodity j in year t (units of
t              production)

           = Monitored production in the project area for up to five years after the
               project start date for commodity j in year t (units of production)

           = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date

5.2 Step 2: Determine the Impact of Leakage Mitigation Activities

          The project proponent may implement activities outside the project area that reduce the amount
          leakage. The areas in which such activities take place are called leakage mitigation areas.
          Leakage mitigation is optional. Leakage mitigation must meet all of the following requirements:

               1) Leakage mitigation must take place in geographically delineated areas within the same
                    region of the project. The project proponent must justify the region for leakage mitigation
                    by referencing the production region of the agricultural commodity that is displaced by
                    the project;

               2) Leakage mitigation areas must not overlap with:

                         a) the project area;
                         b) areas of other carbon projects; and
                         c) leakage mitigation areas of other carbon projects.

               3) The project proponent must sign an agreement with the landowner that explicitly allows
                    the project proponent to uniquely claim the increase in productivity in this area as
                    leakage mitigation from foregone production in the project area. The term of the
                    agreement must be no less than five years from the project start date (or last project
                    instance start date if a grouped project); and

               4) Fuelwood production must only be mitigated through the establishment of new tree
                    plantations.

Leakage mitigation (,) is equal to the difference in production between the project and
baseline scenarios of the leakage mitigation area. Baseline production in the leakage mitigation
area is derived from production over the historical reference period as defined in Section 5.1.1
Baseline production of agricultural commodities in the leakage mitigation area is calculated as
follows:

,       =  =1 ,   ×  (1  +   )  (3)
                

                                                                                                  7
                 VMD0054, v1.0

Where:  = Baseline production in the leakage mitigation area for commodity j in year
OBPj,t      t (units of production)

opj,h   = Baseline production in the leakage mitigation area for commodity j in year
            h of the historical reference period (units of production)
H
rj      = Duration of historical reference period (years)
        = Annual growth rate of commodity yields for commodity j (percent) or the
t
            default value of 0.025 (2.5 percent)
        = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date

Baseline production of fuelwood in the leakage mitigation area (OBP) is zero (i.e., only newly
established tree plantations are eligible). Leakage mitigation is the monitored increase in
production in the leakage mitigation area that is above the baseline levels of production and is
calculated as follows:

, = , - ,                                                                                    (4)

Where:  = Leakage mitigation of commodity j in year t (units of production)
LMj,t   = Monitored production in the leakage mitigation area for commodity j in
OMPj,t
            year t (units of production)
OBPj,t  = Baseline production in the leakage mitigation area for commodity j in year

t           t (units of production)
        = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date

The amount of foregone production that may result in leakage is calculated as follows:

, =  (, - ,, 0)                                                                         (5)

Where:  = Amount of foregone production subject to leakage for commodity j in year
 lj,t       t (units of production); minimum value is zero

 FPj,t  = Foregone production in the project area of commodity j in year t (units of
            production)
 LMj,t
 t      = Leakage mitigation of commodity j in year t (units of production)
        = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date

Leakage mitigation activities involving agricultural intensification in the leakage mitigation area
can potentially increase GHG emissions (e.g., due to increased fertilization or stocking rates).
Project proponents must account for leakage unless they demonstrate it is de minimis.
Appendix 2 of VM0047 Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation must be used to
determine whether decreases in carbon pools and increases in GHG emissions are de minimis.

                                                                                                     8
                        VMD0054, v1.0

In the case of livestock intensification, project proponents must demonstrate that stocking rates
in leakage mitigation areas are not expected to exceed maximum carrying capacity and will not
deplete vegetation and soil resources. Leakage from increased production of supplemental
feedstocks must also be accounted for where supplemental feeding is used. Evidence of
maximum carrying capacity must be sourced from reports prepared by or signed attestations
from qualified independent local experts (e.g., agricultural extension agent, professional
agronomist).

Assessment of nitrous oxide emissions or demonstration of stocking rates compared to carrying
capacity is not required if the leakage mitigation area is included in a registered carbon project
and changes in greenhouse gas emissions and soil carbon stocks are assessed.

5.3 Step 3: Determine Amount of New Land Brought into Production

Where the amount of displaced production that may result in leakage (l) for commodity j in year t
(as calculated above) is greater than zero, the amount of new land that is brought into production
outside the project area in year t is calculated as follows:

,        =  ,  ×   ×                                              (6)
                  ,

Where:            = Area of new land brought into production in year t (ha)
 INLj,t           = Amount of foregone production subject to leakage for commodity j in year
 lj,t
 IS                   t (units of production)
                  = Share of leakage resulting in increased supply outside the project area, or
 NLj
                      default value of 0.75 (75 percent) for agricultural commodities or 1.00
 yj,t                 (100 percent) for fuelwood
 t                = Share of increased supply from new land brought into production for
                      commodity j, or default value of 0.40 (40 percent) for agricultural
                      commodities or 1.00 (100 percent) for fuelwood
                  = Yield on new land brought into production for commodity j in year t (units
                      of production/ha)
                  = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date

A fundamental premise of leakage is that where production is decreased by one unit, production
in other locations will replace some, but not all, of the forgone production. This module uses a
conservative default value of 75 percent for IS which assumes that 75 percent of the agricultural
production lost in the project area is made up through increases in supply outside the project
area (see Appendix 2 for background on default values). It is conservatively assumed that 100
percent of fuelwood production lost in the project area is made up through increases outside the
project area.

The increases in supply outside the project area may or may not result in bringing new lands into
production. Supply increases from agricultural intensification and increases in yields on non-

                                                                                                 9
             VMD0054, v1.0

forest lands will not lead to new lands being brought into agricultural production. This module
uses a conservative default value of 40 percent for NL. This assumes that 40 percent of the
increase in supply of agricultural commodities outside the project is made up through bringing
new land into production (see Appendix 2 for background on default values). It is conservatively
assumed that 100 percent of the increase in supply of fuelwood outside the project is made up
through bringing new land into production.

Where the default value for IS or NL is not applied, the project proponent must provide evidence
justifying the use of a different value where it is less conservative than the default value. Such
evidence may include peer-reviewed studies relevant to the agricultural commodity and the
region of the project. Project proponents may use more conservative values for IS or NL without
providing such evidence.

For subsistence commodities, the yield of NL brought into production must reference the yield in
the project area during the historical reference period.

For fuelwood production, yields based on the average above-ground biomass growth rates
published by the IPCC applicable to the region of the project may be used if regional or national
data are not available.

For non-subsistence commodities, the yield on new land brought into production must reference
the following data sources as available in the order listed (e.g., if two data sources are available,
the data source nearest the top of the list must be used):

     1) The yield in the project area during the historical reference period; or

     2) Regional data on the yields for the relevant agricultural commodities subject to foregone
          production; or

     3) National data on the yields for the relevant agricultural commodities subject to foregone
          production.

The area of new land brought into production (,) must be summed across all commodities
produced in the project area during the historical reference period, as identified in above in
Section 5.1.1, Step 2, to determine the total area generating leakage emissions. The area
generating leakage emissions is calculated as follows:

                                                                                        (7)

 =  ,
         =1

Where:       = Area generating leakage emissions in year t (ha)
 ALt         = Area of new land brought into production for commodity j in year t (ha)
 INLj,t      = Total number of commodities produced in historical reference period
 T           = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date
 t

                                                                                        10
                       VMD0054, v1.0

5.4 Step 4: Determine Change in Carbon Stocks in New Lands Brought
        into Production

          This module assumes that new land brought into production is forested land. The change in
          carbon stocks in the new land that is brought into production is calculated as follows:

 =  +                                                                                               (8)

Where:          = Change in carbon stocks on new lands brought into production (t C/ha)
 CS             = Change in forest biomass carbon stocks equal to the in the regional
 Cbiomass
                    average stock in which the project is located (t C/ha)
 SOC            = Change in soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks in the region in which the

                    project is located (t C/ha)

The change in forest biomass carbon stocks in the area generating leakage emissions assumes
the complete loss of above- and belowground biomass, deadwood and litter.

The change in SOC stock is calculated as the difference between initial reference stocks and
estimated future, steady-state stocks at the end of 20 years.

 =  × (1.00 -  ×  × )                                                                               (9)

Where:          = Change in SOC stock in the area generating leakage emissions (t C/ha)
 SOC            = SOC stock corresponding to the reference condition in native ecosystems
 SOCREF
                    by climate region and soil type applicable to the land receiving the
 fLU, fMG, fIN      displaced activity (t C/ha)
                = Relative SOC stock change factors over 20 years for land use,
                    management practices and inputs respectively, applicable to the
                    displaced production (dimensionless)

5.5 Step 5: Determine Leakage Emissions

          The leakage emissions from new land that is brought into production and where t does not
          exceed 5 years beyond the last project instance start date are calculated as follows:

 =  ×  × 44/12                                                                                      (10)

Where:          = Cumulative leakage up to year t (t CO2e)
 LKt            = Area generating leakage emissions in year t (ha)
 ALt            = Change in carbon stocks on new lands brought into production (t C/ha)
 CS

                                                                                                         11
t                                                                                 VMD0054, v1.0
44/12
                = 1, 2, 3, ..., t years elapsed since the project start date, t must not exceed
                    five years beyond the last project instance start date

                = Conversion factor from C to CO2e

6 DATA AND PARAMETERS

6.1 Data and Parameters Available at Validation

Data/Parameter  pj,h
Data unit
Description     Unit of production, varies by commodity

Equations       Production in the project area for commodity j in year h of the historical
Source of data  reference period

                (1)

                Where available, grower records (e.g., management logs, receipts or
                invoices, logs or files containing machine and/or sensor data), or remote
                sensing methods (e.g., satellite imagery, manned aerial vehicle footage,
                drone imagery) where it is possible to reliably determine requisite
                information on production with these remote sensing methods.

                Where historical production records for the project area do not exist,
                regional (sub-national) average values derived from published census data
                should be used.

                Where historical production records for the project area and regional (sub-
                national) average values do not exist, national average values derived from
                census data must be used. In the case of fuelwood production, average
                aboveground biomass growth rates published by the IPCC (Tables 4.9­
                4.11 of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
                Greenhouse Gas Inventories) may be used where regional or national
                averages are not available.

                When using regional or national average values, official government
                sources must be used where available. In the absence of official
                government sources, published studies may be used to justify such values.
                In addition, when using regional or national average values, such values
                must be derived from all datapoints within the historical reference period
                where such data are available, or from the most recent datapoint to the
                end of the historical reference period otherwise.

                Historical production records must reference the relevant commodity, or
                ownership class where estimates have been disaggregated by those

                                                 12
                                                                     VMD0054, v1.0

                            attributes and substantiated with a signed attestation from the farmer or
                            landowner.

Value applied               Conditional based on source of data

Justification of choice of  Should be collected for a period that includes all years within the three-
data or description of      year period immediately preceding the project start date or all years of one
measurement methods         complete crop rotation where applicable, whichever is longer.
and procedures applied

Purpose of data             Calculation of foregone production

Comments                    Units of production for livestock commodities may be expressed in terms of
                            stocks and may include number of animals, animal units or forage intake
                            units.

Data/Parameter              H

Data unit                   Years

Description                 Number of years within historical reference period used to determine
                            baseline production within the project area

Equations                   (1), (3)

Source of data              N/A

Value applied               A value between 3 and the number of years for one complete crop rotation
                            where applicable, whichever is greater

Justification of choice of  Selected by the project proponent
data or description of
measurement methods
and procedures applied

Purpose of data             Calculation of foregone production

Comments                    None

Data/Parameter              opj,h
Data unit                   Unit of production, varies by commodity

                                                                                                       13
                                                                 VMD0054, v1.0

Description                 Production units of commodity j in the leakage mitigation area in year h of
                            the historical reference period

Equations                   (3)

Source of data              Grower records, or remotely sensed data (e.g., satellite imagery, manned
                            aerial vehicle footage, drone imagery) where it is possible to reliably
                            determine the requisite information on production using these methods

Value applied               Conditional based on source of data

Justification of choice of  Must be collected for each commodity produced in the project area over
data or description of      the historical reference period
measurement methods
and procedures applied

Purpose of data             Calculation of leakage mitigation for foregone production

Comments                    Units of production for livestock commodities may be expressed in terms of
                            stocks and may include number of animals, animal units and forage intake
                            units.

6.2 Data and Parameters Monitored

Data/Parameter              MPj,t
Data unit
Description                 Units of production
Equations
Source of data              Monitored production in the project area for commodity j in year t

Description of              (2)
measurement methods
and procedures to be        Grower records (e.g., management logs, receipts or invoices, logs or files
applied                     containing machine and/or sensor data), or data derived from remote
                            sensing methods (e.g., satellite imagery, manned aerial vehicle footage,
                            drone imagery) where it is possible to reliably determine requisite
                            information on production with these remote sensing methods

                            N/A

                                                                                                      14
                                                                     VMD0054, v1.0

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Calculation of foregone production

Calculation method      N/A

Comments                None

Data/Parameter          rj
Data unit
Description             Percent
Equations
Source of data          Annual growth rate of yield for commodity j

Description of          (1), (3)
measurement methods
and procedures to be    Regional (where available) yield data must be obtained or calculated
applied                 using published studies or official government statistics referencing the
                        smallest territorial administrative division (e.g., district or municipality)
                        that encompasses all areas of land included in the ARR project activity.
                        Yield data must be disaggregated by the ownership classes for which
                        production data are available. In the case of crop commodities, data from
                        FAOSTAT may be used where published studies or official government
                        statistics are not available.

                        Alternatively, a default value of 0.025 (2.5 percent) may be used.

                        When using data from FAOSTAT (for crop commodities only), the following
                        procedures must be applied to calculate the annual growth rate of yield
                        for commodity j:

                            1) For year t (years elapsed since the project start date), find the
                                 yield for commodity j by selecting Group: Production; Domains:
                                 Crops and livestock products; Area: Country where ARR project
                                 activity is located; Element: Yield; and Item: Commodity j.

                            2) Calculate annual growth rate in yield for commodity j as:

                                    =  ( , )  -   1

                                        ,-1

                                                                                                  15
                                                           VMD0054, v1.0

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Calculation of baseline commodity production in the project area and the
                        leakage mitigation area

Calculation method

Comments                Where default value is not applied, the yield data from the year closest to
                        year t must be used unless otherwise justified.

                        Yield data for livestock commodities is expressed in terms of stocking
                        rate and may include number of animals, animal units and forage intake
                        units per hectare.

Data/Parameter          OMPj,t

Data unit               Units of production

Description             Monitored production in the leakage mitigation area for commodity j in
                        year t

Equations               (4)

Source of data          Grower records (e.g., management logs, receipts or invoices, logs or files
                        containing machine and/or sensor data), or data derived from remote
                        sensing methods (e.g., satellite imagery, manned aerial vehicle footage,
                        drone imagery) where it is possible to reliably determine requisite
                        information on production with these remote sensing methods

Description of          N/A

measurement methods

and procedures to be

applied

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Calculation of leakage mitigation

                                                                                                16
                                                                         VMD0054, v1.0

Calculation method      N/A
Comments                None

Data/Parameter          IS

Data unit               Percent

Description             Share of leakage resulting in increased supply outside the project area

Equations               (6)

Source of data

Description of          Default value of 0.75 (75 percent) for agricultural commodities or 1.00
measurement methods     (100 percent) for fuelwood.
and procedures to be
applied                 Where the default value is not applied, evidence justifying the use of a
                        different value must be provided. Such evidence may include
                        government-approved or peer-reviewed studies relevant to the
                        agricultural commodity and region in which the project is located.

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Estimation of area of new land brought into production

Calculation method

Comments                See Appendix 2 for background on default values

Data/Parameter          NLj
Data unit               Percent
Description             Share of increased supply from new land brought into production for
                        commodity j
Equations               (6)

                                                                                                17
                                                                         VMD0054, v1.0

Source of data          Default value of 0.40 (40 percent) for agricultural commodities or 1.00
                        (100 percent) for fuelwood.

                        Where the default value is not applied, evidence justifying the use of a
                        different value must be provided. Such evidence may include
                        government-approved or peer-reviewed studies relevant to the commodity
                        produced and region in which the project is located.

Description of          N/A

measurement methods

and procedures to be

applied

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Estimation of area of new land brought into production

Calculation method      N/A

Comments                See Appendix 2 for background on default values

Data/Parameter          yj,t
Data unit
Description             Production units per hectare per year
Equations
Source of data          Yield on new lands brought into production for commodity j in year t

Description of          (6)
measurement methods
and procedures to be    Government data or published studies
applied                 Productivity data must be obtained or calculated using official
                        government statistics or published studies where available. For crop
                        commodities, data from FAOSTAT may be used where official government
                        statistics or published studies are not available. Where none of the above
                        sources of data are available, or for subsistence commodities, yield in the
                        project area during the historical reference period may be used.

                        Data from the year closest to that for which leakage emissions are being
                        calculated must be used.
                        For non-subsistence commodities, the yield on new land brought into
                        production must reference regional yields for the relevant agricultural

                                                                                18
                                                                              VMD0054, v1.0

                        commodities subject to foregone production. Where regional data are not
                        available, national data must be used. In the absence of regional and
                        national data for the commodity, the yield in the project area during the
                        historical reference period must be used. In the case of fuelwood
                        production, yields based on the average aboveground biomass growth
                        rates published by the IPCC applicable to the region of the project may be
                        used where regional or national data are not available.

                        For subsistence commodities, the yield of new land brought into
                        production must reference the yield in the project area during the
                        historical reference period.

                        When using data from FAOSTAT (for crop commodities only), the following
                        procedure must be applied. For the year t (number of years elapsed since
                        the project start date), find the yield for commodity j by selecting Group:
                        Production; Domains: Crops and livestock products; Area: Country where
                        ARR project activity is located; Element: Yield; Item: Commodity j.

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Calculation of area of new land brought into production

Calculation method      N/A

Comments                Where yield data are not available for year t, yield data from the year
                        closest to the year t must be used unless otherwise justified.

                        Yield on new lands brought into production for livestock commodities may
                        be expressed in terms of stocking rate and may include number of
                        animals, animal units and forage intake units per hectare per year.

Data/Parameter          Cbiomass
Data unit
Description             t C/ha

Equations               The change in forest biomass carbon stocks equal to the regional
                        average stock where the project is located.
                        (8)

                                                                                          19
                                                              VMD0054, v1.0

Source of data          Published studies with data from country in which the project is located
                        where such data are available, or derived from Table 3A.1.4 of the IPCC
                        Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry
                        (IPCC 2003) where such data are not available.

Description of           must reference the following data sources as available in the
measurement methods     order listed, (e.g., if two data sources are available the data source
and procedures to be    nearest the top of the list must be used):
applied
                         · mean carbon stocks in forest biomass in the region; or

                         · mean carbon stocks in forest biomass in the country where the
                               project is located and must be obtained from published studies or
                               official government statistics; or

                         · mean carbon stocks in forest biomass derived from above-ground
                               biomass estimates in Table 3A.1.4 of the IPCC Good Practice
                               Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (IPCC 2003)
                               if such information is not available.

                        Determined based on data available at the time of the assessment and
                        reflecting area-weighted mean stocks in above- and belowground
                        biomass, dead wood and litter pools at the nearest date to the
                        assessment date.

                        If biomass is presented in tonnes of dry biomass per hectare, then carbon
                        stocks should be determined using a carbon fraction default value of
                        0.47.

                        If only aboveground biomass stocks are reported, then belowground
                        biomass stocks should be estimated using allometric equations
                        contained in Table 4.A.4 of IPCC (2003), unless verifiable information is
                        provided to justify a different value.

                        Similarly, if data presented include tree biomass only, then the carbon
                        stocks in deadwood and litter must be estimated by multiplying the sum
                        of aboveground and belowground biomass stocks by a factor of 1.1.1

Frequency of            At the time of each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Calculation of leakage emissions

Calculation method      N/A

1 Source: CDM AR-TOOL15, v2.0

                                                                                                                  20
                                                  VMD0054, v1.0

Comments                None

Data/Parameter          SOCREF

Data unit               t C/ha

Description             Soil organic carbon (SOC) stock corresponding to the reference condition
                        in native ecosystems by climate region and soil type applicable to the
                        land receiving the displaced activity

Equations               (9)

Source of data          Table 2.3 of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for
                        National Greenhouse Gas Inventories

Description of          Where soils vary across the region of production, a weighted average
measurement methods     (based on relative commodity production) or the highest, most
and procedures to be    conservative value may be used.
applied

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         To calculate change in carbon stocks on new lands brought into
                        production

Calculation method      N/A

Comments                None

Data/Parameter          fLU, fMG, fIN
Data unit
Description             Dimensionless

Equations               Relative SOC stock change factors applicable to the displaced production
                        over 20 years for land use, management practices and inputs
                        respectively

                        (9)

                                                                                              21
                                                          VMD0054, v1.0

Source of data          Table 5.5 (displaced crops, referencing tree crops in the case of
                        fuelwood) and Table 6.2 (displaced grazing) of the 2019 Refinement to
                        the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories

Description of          N/A

measurement methods

and procedures to be

applied

Frequency of            At each monitoring event
monitoring/recording

QA/QC procedures to be
applied

Purpose of data         Calculation of leakage emissions

Calculation method      N/A

Comments                None

7 REFERENCES

          Alexandratos, N., & Bruinsma, J. (2012). World Agriculture towards 2030/2050: The 2012
          Revision. Food and Agricultural Organization Agricultural Development Economics Division.
          http://www.fao.org/docrep/016/ap106e/ap106e.pdf

          Fuglie, K., & Nin-Pratt, A. (2012). Agricultural productivity: A changing global harvest. In
          International Food Policy Research Institute (Ed.), 2012 Global food policy report (pp. 14­27).
          International Food Policy Research Institute. http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896295537

          IPCC (2003). Good practice guidance for land use, land-use change and forestry. Institute for
          Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). https://www.ipcc.ch/publication/good-practice-guidance-
          for-land-use-land-use-change-and-forestry/

          IPCC (2019). 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas
          Inventories Volume 4. IPCC. https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/index.html

          Roberts, M. J., & Schlenker, W. (2013). Identifying supply and demand elasticities of agricultural
          commodities: Implications for the US ethanol mandate. American Economic Review, 103(6),
          2265­2295. https://www.doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.6.2265

                                                                                               22
                                                                                       VMD0054, v1.0

Verra (2014). AFOLU project market leakage: Production approach. Public consultation document
29 May 2014. https://stg.verra.org/wp-content/uploads/imported/methodologies/AFOLU-
Project-Market-Leakage-Public-Consultation.pdf

                                                                                                         23
                                                           VMD0054, v1.0

APPENDIX 1: LEAKAGE EXAMPLE

The following example demonstrates the application of the leakage module in hypothetical scenario. All of
the values presented have been rounded to make the example simpler to read.

In year 1, a project area of 1,000 hectares is planted to trees. All cattle that were grazed in the project
area are sold prior to tree planting. In the three years prior to the planting date, 300, 330 and 360 cattle
were grazed in the project area respectively.

The project proponent undertakes leakage mitigation activities in a designated area outside the project
area (leakage mitigation area) to increase production of cattle. In the three years prior to the planting
date, 400, 420 and 440 cattle were grazed in the leakage mitigation area.

In year 5, the production of cattle in the leakage mitigation area has increased to 536 cattle (+5.0
percent per year). The yield for cattle in the region of the project area is 1.70 cattle/ha.

The total forest biomass carbon stock is 130.6 tonnes, calculated as the product of aboveground tree
biomass (209 tonnes biomass), carbon fraction of tree biomass (0.50) and biomass expansion factor
(1.25). Initial reference SOC stocks in native forest in the region of production are 60 tonnes,
corresponding to tropical wet climate, high activity clay soils per Table 2.3 of the 2019 Refinement to the
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Relative stock change factors for
grassland management used are 1.0 (land use), 0.7 (management) and 1.0 (inputs) per Table 6.2 of the
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.

Step 1: Determine foregone production in the project area

A historical reference period (H) of 3 years is selected by the project proponent. With Equation (1),
baseline production of cattle in the project area, using the default production growth rate of 2.5 percent,
is calculated in year 5 as follows:

,  =  =1 ,   ×  (1  +   )                                  (1)
           

,=5   =  (300   + 330 +    360)  × (1 + 0.025)5  =  373  
                    3

In year 5, the project area is monitored to quantify the number of cattle grazed in the area after the
project start date. Because the cattle previously in the project area were completely removed, and no
cattle are grazed after the start date, the foregone production (FP) in the project area in year 5 of the
project is calculated using Equation (2):

, = , - ,                                                  (2)

,=5 = 373  - 0  = 373 

                                                                                                           24
                                                               VMD0054, v1.0

Step 2: Determine the impact of leakage mitigation activities

Using Equation (3), the baseline production in the leakage mitigation area in year 5 is calculated as
follows:

,  =  =1 ,    ×  (1  +   )                                     (3)
           

,=5   =   (400   + 420  + 440)  ×  (1 + 0.025)5  =  475 
                     3

Using Equation (4), and per the assumption above that the number of cattle grazed in the leakage
mitigation area in year 5 is 536, the amount of leakage mitigation (LM) in year 5 is calculated as follows:

, = , - ,                                                      (4)

,=5 = 536  - 475  = 61 

Using Equation (5), the amount of foregone production subject to leakage in year 5 is calculated as
follows:

, = , - ,                                                      (5)

,=5 = 373  - 61  = 313 

Step 3: Determine amount of new land brought into production

Using Equation (6) and the default values for IS (75 percent) and NL (40 percent), the amount of new
land brought into production (INL) is calculated as follows:

,  =  ,××                                                      (6)
           ,

,=5 =     313 × 0.75 × 0.40  = 55 

                 1.70

Using Equation (7), considering that cattle were the only agricultural commodity produced in the historical
reference period in the project area, then the area of new land brought into production and generating
leakage is calculated as follows:

 = =1 ,                                                        (7)

=5 = 55 

                                                                                                       25
                                                                               VMD0054, v1.0

Step 4: Determine change in carbon stocks in new land brought into production

Using Equation (8), the change in carbon stocks on new land that is brought into production in year 5 is
calculated as follows:

 =  +                                                                          (8)

CS = (130  / + 18  /) = 148 /

Where:

 =  - ( × ( ×  × ))                                                            (9)

 = 60  / - (60  / × (1.00 × 0.70 × 1.00)) = 18  /

Step 5: Determine leakage emissions

Using Equation (10), leakage emissions from new land that is brought into production in year 5 is
calculated as follows:

 =  ×  × 44/12                                                                 (10)

=5 = 55  × (149  /) × 44/12 = 30,048  2

                                                                                                   26
                                                                                                VMD0054, v1.0

APPENDIX 2: BACKGROUND ON
DEFAULT VALUES

Growth rate of production

The default value for growth rates of production has been developed based on reports from the
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). This
default value based on the growth rates of production has been applied within this module to serve as a
proxy for growth rates in yields. Analysis from the IFPRI indicates that global average agricultural growth
rates over the past 40 years have remained less than 2.5 percent per decade, with values ranging from
2.08 percent to 2.42 percent (Fuglie & Nin-Pratt, 2012). Reports from FAO confirm that this is a
conservative default value for growth rates. FAO predicts that agricultural growth rates within developing
countries will decrease in the coming decades with an average value of 1.6 percent from 2007 to 2030
and 0.9 percent from 2030 to 2050 (Alexandratos & Bruinsma, 2012). Therefore, 2.5 percent has been
selected as a conservative default value for commodity production. Projects may justify using regional or
country-specific values instead where such data are relevant and available.

Share of leakage resulting in increased supply

The default value for the share of leakage resulting in increased supply of agricultural commodities
outside the project area was developed considering elasticities of supply and demand as well as
observed prices and quantities to develop constant elasticity of substitution (CES) demand, supply and
reduced supply curves. The analysis for developing the conservative default value used elasticities of
supply and demand across commodities and countries from peer-reviewed economic studies. Data on
exogenous prices and quantities of commodities in specific geographic regions were gathered from
several sources including USDA Economic Research Service (ERS), the Food and Agricultural Organization
of the United Nations (FAO), Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) and Trading Economics. The
elasticity data on agricultural commodities and forest products indicated that no commodities
experienced perfectly inelastic supply or demand. Averaging across global commodities, production
losses occurring within the project would result in a 13 to 72 percent increase in supply elsewhere.
Therefore, 75 percent was selected as a conservative default value.

Share of increased supply coming from new land brought into production

The default value for the increased supply coming from new land brought into production was developed
based on data and reports from the FAO. Such studies indicate that globally only 10 percent of the
increases in agricultural production will come from new land being brought into production (Alexandratos
& Bruinsma, 2012). Some sub-regions such as Latin America and the Caribbean may experience 40
percent of future supply coming from new land being brought into production. While these studies provide
predictions regarding long-term trends in production, other studies on short-term trends result in other
conclusions. Roberts and Schlenker (2013) provide evidence that shorter-term price shocks do not follow

                                                                                                                  27
                                                                                                VMD0054, v1.0

these longer-term trends and the increase in production is primarily made up by bringing new land into
production.
The default value has been developed based on the assumption that projects will have longer-term
impacts on commodity markets. Based on the FAO data, 40 percent was selected as a conservative
threshold for the default value for agricultural commodities. This default value may be updated in the
future where ARR projects are shown to have shorter-term impacts on commodity markets.
Conservative assumptions used
The use of the above default values is further supported by the following conservative assumptions that
have been employed elsewhere in this module:

  1) New lands brought into production are assumed to be forested lands;
  2) Positive leakage effects from ARR activities that provide timber to the market and reduce

        harvesting on existing forested lands are not included. Similarly, increases in production in leakage
        mitigation areas that occur after leakage emissions are calculated are not included;
  3) Leakage calculations conservatively ignore that new lands brought into production outside the host
        country would reduce the amount of new land brought into production within the host country and
        would reduce leakage emissions (limited to domestic emissions under the VCS Standard); and
  4) Leakage estimated in this module do not decrease with time, however, the actual leakage effects
        may be expected to decrease as the share of carbon projects and the impact on market supply and
        prices from foregone production increase over time.

                                                                                                                  28
                                                VMD0054, v1.0

DOCUMENT HISTORY

Version  Date         Changes
v1.0     28 Sep 2023  Initial version released

                                                29
